I'm the number one heavyweight in the
world right now and I'm scared to fight
everybody. What about John Jones? I'd be
an idiot otherwise. But now that I
understand fear and what it does for me,
it just fuels me so much in a way that
nothing else can. So, I'll be prepared
to do whatever I need to do. But I just
don't like what he's doing because I
can't function knowing that I trained
for a fight and didn't actually fight
somebody.
Jon Jones is officially retired. Tom
Aspenol is the heavyweight champion of
the UFC. Did you see this coming? And do
you have any idea when you'll be back in
the octagon? I do. Yeah. Yeah. Tom,
you're the only ever British heavyweight
champion of the UFC. So, what advice can
you give young men that are struggling
to find that sense of purpose? It takes
years to become an overnight success.
I've been going since I was 8 years old
and I've been up against so many tests
from career ending injuries to financial
struggles to mental struggles and at one
point we had three kids at the age of 25
and I had no money. I mean, my first pro
fight I got 200 quid. I felt the
pressure trying to be a young guy but
having all this responsibility on me.
Having to borrow money from friends to
buy nappies for my kids so I can keep
living on this dream. But outlasting
people and consistency is massively
underrated. And in today's day and age,
people just have a lot of options. But
that obsessiveness of being 100% focused
on something, you win. Tom, there's this
black box in front of me which contains
something which represents a pivotal
moment in your career. What is the story
behind this?
It was the most devastating thing that
happened in my whole career.
So, ahead of showing you that interview
which we recorded a while ago, I wanted
to call Tom and get his first reaction
to the news that he's now the UFC's
undisputed heavyweight champion of the
world. So, what I'm about to show you is
a conversation I had with Tom hours
after the news was announced that he's
now the undisputed heavyweight champion
of the world. And then I'm going to play
the long form interview that me and Tom
had several weeks ago right here in the
studio. Enjoy. Tom, did you um did you
see this coming?
Uh yes, but I just didn't expect it. Um
when it happened, I expected it. So,
next week I'm going to Vegas. I'm going
for the Well, they say it's the biggest
fight card of the year, a fight card
called International Fight Week.
And I knew that I had some news coming
on International Fight Week. We got wind
that Jon Jones is gonna retire and
they're going to announce it on
International Fight Week, but for some
reason they announced it um last night.
I don't know what that reason is. It
took me by surprise at least. Um but
they announced it last night. What was
your initial honest gut reaction when
you found out he was retiring? Where
were you? What was your first feeling
when you heard that news?
Well, I only knew 100% actually last
night. It was always like rumors of him
retiring. He's putting stuff out on the
media saying that he's retiring because
MMA especially at elite level is quite
there's not many people like you hear
rumors a lot. So I heard rumors from
people close to him that he's going to
retire and that he's not living like an
athlete um who's fighting at the top
level anymore and that he's not
interested and he's not in the gym and
etc. But I knew that there was going to
be a decision made by the UFC coming
soon whether he's going to continue and
um we got it last night for sure. We we
finally got it confirmed last night. So,
I am uh very happy to get this part of
my career behind me in the rearview
mirror now.
But, but how did you feel? Because I
think from the conversation we had,
which we're going to play in a second,
it was clear to me that you wanted to
have Jon Jones on your record. You
wanted to fight him. What I really
wanted is is the undisputed title.
That's really what I was chasing the
whole time. I was never really chasing
one guy. Jon Jones was always just a
bonus because of the sto because of the
resume that he's got and because of the
name that he has and the the status that
he holds within the within the sport.
Like he's so well respected. I think
that would have been a great scalp for
me to have on my resume. But uh
ultimately I was chasing the belt. I was
chasing being the number one heavyweight
fighter in the world, which uh I am and
I can say that I am now, especially with
John not around and he's retired and
that's behind us. But um ultimately the
thing that I wanted really was was the
belt. the fact that John's left the
sport. Obviously, it would have been
better for me career-wise to have that
name. Financially, it would have been
great as well, but um the thing that I
was ultimately chasing was uh the
heavyweight title. And how do you think
about John's decision? Do you do you
view it as a strategic dodge or do you
view it as a genuine sort of closing of
that chapter in his uh of his legacy?
I think that he's entitled to do
whatever he wants to be honest. I'm not
um he's done way more in the sport than
I have. So, he should do whatever he
feels is right. I speaking as as just a
fighter here. If it was if it was so
public
for me personally, I don't know if my
ego could take it having not done it. Um
but that's that's honestly that's his
prerogative. I don't hold any ill will
against him for it. And I'm I'm happy to
move on with my career now that it's
over. Because you got to remember, I've
not fought for nearly a year now because
of this. And I've been healthy the whole
time. I've been in the gym the whole
time. I've been doing exactly what I'm
supposed to do as a high level operating
athlete at the elite level. So I'm glad
that that is behind us. Well, do you in
part, I guess, take this as a bit of a
compliment that there was such huge
public pressure for him to fight you and
actually the route that he chose was to
retire instead of fighting you? I mean,
that's quite a compliment for someone of
Jon Jones stature.
Uh, I try not to let my ego take control
of me. Um, I could see why people would
think that, but to me it's just like
maybe when I've retired I'll cons when
I've retired myself, which is not going
to happen in the next couple of years at
least. Um, I'll think about that kind of
stuff. But for right now, it's just like
we got to focus on another fight. We've
got to get me active. We got to get me
back out there and doing what doing what
I'm supposed to be doing. Cuz right now,
I've been thinking about that whole
situation and being held up and
frustrated for almost a year. And it's
not it's what I love doing. I've been
I've been held back for the whole time
and it's not been very fun to be honest
with you. So my the the ego side of my
brain is like, "Yep, I've kind of beat
him without fighting him." And I did say
that. I've said that the whole time that
I'm going to retire him without fighting
him. Uh but I don't kind of want to harp
on about that really. I want to kind of
just put that behind me and move forward
on my own path. Now I hear and you know,
John Jones is a an unpredictable
individual. So there's still a
possibility that that retirement wasn't
a legit retirement and that he might get
a bit bored and end up, you know,
deciding that he wants to come back and
fight you. Is that something that you
would consider if that were to happen?
I'm sure with where he's at, he can like
jump the queue anytime he wants. So, you
know, this time a year down the line,
we'll have another three or four
contenders knocking on for a title shot,
I'm sure. But anytime someone like him
wants to step up and say, "Listen, I
want to fight again." They're going to
get an immediate title shot. So, uh, I'm
never going to count that out. And I'm
sure that maybe he's, you know, I'm in a
spot in my career where there's not all
that much footage out there on me. Maybe
he sees something on me in the next few
fights and he thinks, you know what, I
can beat this guy. I'm going to come
back and beat him. So mentally, I'm
never counting that out. I think the the
the fight is always it could always pop
back up and come back around on me. So
that's something that I would obviously
accept. But as I said before, I think a
lot of people get it confused over the
last kind of 10 monthsish is that I was
chasing Jon Jones. That was never the
case. I was chasing the the undisputed
heavyweight title. That's it. So, if I
can if I do get the opportunity to put
Jon Jones on my resume, of course, I'll
I'll accept that with open arms. But if
not, I'm content. I'll move forward and
I'll uh create my own legacy without
him. And what what has changed
overnight? Is there as a UFC fan, is
there anything that I'm unaware of that
changes when Dana announces you as the
Undisputed? Does your contract change?
Does Does there anything that changes
other than the fact that you've now got
a sort of a clear path and you're now
the one being chased? You're no longer
chasing. Well, I was on uh cuz I was an
interim champ cuz I was a champion in my
own right as well. So, I I I was already
getting a lot of the uh a lot of the
perks that come with being a champion.
stuff like pay-per-view points is
something that you get when you're a
champion. You also get, you know, uh
pay-per-view points is where you get a
cut of the pay-per-view sales. Okay? So,
I don't want to go into the details of
my contracts, of course, but you'll get
if someone pays, you know, $60 for a
pay-per-view, you might get $2, you
might get $5 per bar, you might get 10
people, different people have different
um different perks in the contract. So,
I I was already having that cuz I was a
I was a champion in my own right anyway.
But yeah, not nothing actually really
changes. Just the fact that there isn't
two belts anymore in the division, which
is great. There's one face, one name,
and one guy in in the division. And to
me, that is what that's what separates
uh MMA from other sports, other fight
sports at least, is that for example, in
boxing, you can have like five, six,
seven, eight, even sometimes different
organization. You got the WBO, the WBC,
the IBO, the IBF, and all these
different ones that I don't even know
about. and they all have different
champions in each organization. Whereas
generally speaking, the number one guy
in the world is the UFC champion. And
before Jon Jones retired, there was two
of us in the division, which is a little
bit of a strange strange conundrum that
I wasn't comfortable being in. I think
that there should be one guy in every
division. And uh now that that John's
gone, obviously we didn't get to fight
about it, which I would have liked. Um,
but at least there's one guy and uh I'm
I'm happy with that moving forward. And
who's the who's the number one contender
now? You're now being chased, right? You
were doing a little bit of chasing in
terms of trying to get that um unified,
but but who in your mind is the number
one contender now for the heavyweight
title belt. Oh, that's uh that's I'm I'm
more than happy being chased. That's
fantastic. I I would rather be the
hunted as opposed to the Hunter because
I' i've been chas I don't like chasing
fights. I like just being the guy and
everyone comes to me. That's fantastic.
So, most the I've actually fought a lot
of the top 10. Um, one of the guys I've
not fought is uh Sir Gana, French guy.
That's a a fight that I was look I was
actually chasing that fight a few times
before. He was he was ducking and diving
around himself a little bit. So, he is
due a little bit of a beating off me. I
look forward to that. Um, couple more
guys down the rankings. A Brazilian guy
Jelton Almeida I've not fought. There's
a guy I've already beat called Alexander
Vulkov who's doing really well for
himself as well. So, who knows? You
never know in the heavyweight division.
There's a couple of up andcoming guys
who I've not mentioned as well. So,
there's some some good fights to be made
over the next couple of years for sure.
If I were to say myself, it'd be great
to see you fight gone in uh in London or
in the UK somewhere um as your next
fight. Do do you have any idea what
you're doing next and when you'll be
back in the Octagon?
I do, but I also want to keep I also
want to keep my job, so there's not much
I can say it to be honest. Um, but yeah,
this year, yeah, I'm going to be
fighting hopefully twice this year.
That's that's my plan at least. I think
I think I've wasted enough time um now.
So, um, we're looking for a quick we're
we're looking to get a fight booked
quick and it's looking like it's going
to be, you know, pretty soon anyway. Um,
and then hopefully if everything goes
well in the first one, um, I'm
uninjured, which is, you know, it's
easier said than done, uh, getting
through a fight with with a guy my size
and and coming out with no injuries.
But, um, if I if I can do that, I would
like to fight at the end of the year as
well. That'd be perfect.
And, uh, are you off to training now?
Are you you're flying out to Vegas, so
I'm assuming you're you're going to the
UFC center out there and starting
training?
No. So, I'm I'm training constantly
regardless if I've got a fight or not.
The only thing that changes for me is
basically intensity in uh in the
sessions, but I'm actually going to
Vegas for well, I am the heavyweight
champion of the world, so they're going
to want me at the big shows. Uh so, I'm
going to I'm going to be showing my face
there, doing a little bit of media and
stuff. I will, of course, be doing a
little bit of training, you know, ju
just different stuff. I'm working with a
new sponsor who I'm going to be with
till the end of my career, which is
Champion. So, I'll be working with them
out there and uh just doing bits for the
UFC, meeting fans and and doing bits of
training, just being around the scene.
And I don't often, to be honest, I'm so
routine and I'm so routine based and
goal focused that I don't like to leave
my home routine and training regimen
that often. So, uh, when I go to the US
and do things like this, I like to do as
much in a short space of time as
possible so I can get back to my, uh,
cuz I know what I know what I need to do
to to be good and to win fights and, uh,
that's be at home and be in my routine
and and be focused. So, I don't like to
leave my routine too much and go
overseas and do all this other stuff.
So, I'll be killing as many birds with
one stone in this trip as possible.
You're um, you're a family man, Tom. I
got a real understanding of that in the
conversation that I'm about to play. Um,
your family very close to you. You're a
father. What's the reaction been like
with your your partner, your your your
kids, your your father, your your
parents over the last couple of hours
since you've been crowned as the
undisputed.
Uh, to be honest, um, it didn't really
make much of a difference. I think a lot
of people said the same thing outside of
my family as well. It was like you were
kind of the champion anyway cuz I think
the way that Jon Jones played it the
last year or so, it just didn't a lot of
people didn't see him as the the unified
heavyweight champion anyway. So, I think
a lot of people close to me, like I told
my kids this morning, they were just
like not bothered at all. Didn't make
didn't make the slightest bit of
difference. I said, "Look, I'm only
telling you so when your friends tell
you at school, you'll know." And they
were like, "Okay, fair enough." That
that was it. There was no there was no
great reaction there. Say to them, what
did you say to them? Well, it was just
my my it's mainly my oldest son because
my my twins, they're a little bit too
young to really understand. They've just
turned six, so they don't really get it.
But my oldest son's nine almost. Um his
friends are following MMA a little bit
more. So, he kind of they started
thinking it's cool now. So, I told my
son, I was like, "Listen, I just let you
know, Jon Jones retired. I'm the
undisputed champion now. I've got, you
know, this one." And he was just like,
"Oh, okay." And I was like, I'm just I
know you're not that bothered. I'm just
letting you know. So if your friends say
anything, you know. And he was like,
okay, thanks. John's probably watching
this. Um he has undoubtedly had one of
the greatest careers in the history of
the UFC up there with the likes of Kabib
and many of the legends through history.
What would you say to him if he was
watching this now?
That's it's a great question. I I don't
I don't know if he will be watching
this. I'm not sure. But if he if he is,
uh I think he's had an amazing career
and I think he should enjoy the rest of
his life. I think if he if he truly
feels like he's done enough, which he
keeps saying that he does, he will be at
peace. He doesn't need me or anybody
else to tell him uh how good he's done.
He should he'll know it himself. So uh I
hope that he's he's enjoying his life.
He's enjoying his family and he's
celebrating his career because it's been
amazing. Tom, uh congratulations. I
think I speak on behalf of a lot of
Brits and really people all around the
world when I say that um you're the
champion I think the UFC especially at
that the heavyweight division has really
been longing for someone who wants to be
active someone who is um seeking the
biggest fights someone who is willing to
fight anybody but also someone that's
just really really relatable and I think
sends a message to all of all of us that
what I'd class as a very normal guy from
humble beginnings can reach the very top
of the professional um pyramid as it
relates to sports and entertainment. So,
thank you so much for representing the
UK in UF in the UFC, especially at the
heavyweight level, which we've never had
before. But, I will all be rooting for
you uh for so many reasons because of
who you are, but also because of the
exciting way that you've um conducted
yourself in and outside of the octagon.
So, I'm going to let you go. Um we're
going to play the interview now that we
recorded a little while ago, but um
yeah, going to be watching your career
very, very closely and um going to be
ringside whenever you fight next. Uh, I
know there's a lot of people that are
going to turn out to support you. So,
thank you so much, Tom. Thank you very
much for having me. And, uh, if you're
there, as always, cuz we know each other
now. And I know it's difficult when you
know somebody personally. Um,
anytime I fight, you got to strap in. Be
ready for anything because it's
heavyweight MMA at the highest level and
anything can happen. So, thank you for
having me, Stephen, and I look forward
to uh to seeing you there. Thank you.
Tom, if I had met you when you were a
kid and I'd asked you, what do you want
to be when you're older, what would you
have said to me?
Well, it depends on the age, of course,
but I think if you would have asked me
from the age of being
9 years old and above, I would have said
that I'm going to be UFC heavyweight
champion at 9 years old. Yeah. As soon
as I kind of like went to a gym and I
realized there's people in this gym who
are adults and they don't have a regular
job and they're just showing up to the
gym every day and fighting every few
months and getting money for it. Like I
was I was literally like this is what I
want to do. So take me back. So where do
you where did you come from for someone
that doesn't know who you are? They
don't know your story. They don't know
Tom Aspenol's origin. Where did you come
from? Um, so I'm from a place I was born
in Sulford, which is like Greater
Manchester, and then I moved to a
different part of Greater Manchester, a
place called Allison. There's not a lot
of stuff going on there to be honest. I
mean, it's just like a normal
workingass blue collar place. Do you
know what I mean? A lot a lot of
families like the parents work in
factories, they
mechanics, they
plumbers. And what were your family in
that context? So, my dad originally
worked in IT. He got paid some
redundancy money and then he decided to
start teaching grappling full-time,
which we're talking when we're talking
like 20 years ago, the grappling
industry in the UK was non-existent. And
obviously, I was quite a I was a
budding, but I wasn't I wasn't even like
a budding prospect at the time. My dad
had no fights at the time, but I was
training and I was enjoying my training
and my dad wanted to spend more time
perfecting me to help me do what I enjoy
a little bit more. So, was he the
inspiration for you to go to the gym the
first time and start training or So,
it's difficult to say because I had like
a bit of a blurred line as to where I
started actually training martial arts.
So, I started training when I was young,
but it was my dad's thing more and I
just used to go with my dad like to
spend some time with my dad and cuz I
didn't really have much else to do. But
I used to always go down to the gym and
when I started training there were no
like kids classes. Like now you can go
to the end of the road and there'll be
an MMA gym with kids classes on with 20
kids in the class. Like that wasn't my
case when I started at 8 n years old.
Like I used to go to the gym there used
to be 10 40 year old guys rolling around
on the floor with each other and I just
used to jump in when there was a smaller
guy available. Otherwise I'd just be
like kicking the football around the gym
or something like that. Like basically
I've grown up in in gyms. But when I
actually started training seriously,
that was probably when I was like 14,
13, 14, something like that. And was
there ever a moment in those early years
where you realized or someone said
something to you that you can still
remember that proved to you that you
were better than normal people at this
thing? I do remember a few instances.
Like I said, I used to train with adults
even when I was a child.
And I was quite aware even from being
young that the adults were like taking
it easy on me, you know, like they were
letting me get position and letting me
do certain things on them and they
weren't really trying as much. And uh I
remember
feeling like the adults are starting
going harder on me. Do if that makes
sense. Does that make sense? I remember
I used to just have all my own way in
training because the adults a lot of the
time were like my dad's friends and his
students and then they would I would
always be around the gym so they'd know
me and they take it easy and stuff like
that. And then I remember like a couple
of the couple of the guys who I trained
with, like I said, I was like 11, 12
years old. And I remember a couple of
the guys like it became a lot more
physical training. Like it became a lot
more competitive whereas before they
were just like letting me do my thing
and then they started fighting back a
little bit more. And then I remember
thinking, ah, well, I must be all right.
like if if they're trying I remember
realizing that people actually started
trying against me and then they finish
around and look like they'd done a
workout a little bit rather than just
played with a kid if that makes sense.
And was that I'm trying to figure out as
well the the thing that encouraged you
to keep going at that point because at
that age you can end up playing
football, you can end up going and
joining this club, you can end up
focusing on some drama class that you're
doing but there must have been something
that kind of held you in this habit. I
mean I definitely tried all that stuff.
I definitely um I mean my area is like
quite a big rugby area. So like rugby
league we play up there and uh I
definitely delved in that a little bit
but I just never really was my thing you
know. I think cuz my dad and my brother
was heavily involved with martial arts
and that's just where I always felt like
safe to a degree is like in the gym. I
know it sounds really weird, but I felt
like when you're involved in martial
arts, it's almost like there can be 10
guys in the room and they can all be
from different backgrounds,
male, female, one guy can be 12 years
old, the other guy can be 65 years old.
One guy's retired, the other guy's at
college, one guy's black, the other
guy's Chinese. It doesn't matter. Like
when you're in there, it none of that
matters. And everyone just respects each
other and gets on regardless of like
race, gender, age,
what the job is. And none of that stuff
matters. Everyone just respects each
other the same. And I was always like
drawn to that more than anything. I was
that's where I always felt my most
comfortable. And especially cuz I was a
bit more of a shy kid. I felt like I
could really express myself through
martial arts. And something else about
martial arts is like cuz it's an
individual sport. it's like always on
you if you do well or not. And I
realized like the more time I put in,
the more I got out of it, like mentally
and physically, like I would get better
the more I did it. Whereas with team
sports, especially rugby because that's
the team sport I've done the most. Like
there would be games where I personally
had had like an amazing game, but the
team had lost and I could see the next
guy not trying as hard as me. or
sometimes vice versa. Sometimes they'd,
you know, I'd had a terrible game, but
the team had won and everyone would be
really happy and I'd be like, "Oh, I had
a bad game." And I couldn't I could
never shake that. I'd always like want
to I always liked control. Control.
Yeah. Being in charge of like my own
thing. And MMA in particular is very
much that it's like if you're not
putting the work in, like you will get
exposed. You will get your ego checked
literally on a daily basis if you're not
doing what you need to do. And I love
that like it gives you a sense of like
accountability for
just your everyday habits like your
thought process, what you're putting in
your body, how much recovery you're
getting, how many reps are you doing in
the gym, everything like everything is
accounted for publicly and I quite like
that. I quite love that actually. Um,
your mother in this picture, where does
she fit into this picture you've painted
for me? And who is she? Uh, she first of
all, she is the nicest woman that has
ever walked the face of the earth. I
think she is such a lovely person. Yeah,
there is literally, you know, when
someone says the term, oh, she's not got
or they've not got a bad bone in the
body, that literally applies to my mom.
But as far as So, my last fight that I
had, which is in Manchester, my home my
hometown. That was the first fight that
my mom's ever been to really. And I'm
already like number one in the world.
I'm like, bloody hell, mom, you've lived
it this long. But yeah, she she is she
just stays away from the MMA side of
things. She is just a mom, which is
great. That's amazing. She is a really
really uh lovely person. Why was that
the first fight she'd ever come to? Cuz
it's scary. And I You didn't want her to
come or No, it's not No, it's not that I
didn't want her to. I I was It's never
been like her thing. So, I would never
like be like, "Oh, mom, can you please
come?" Because I know it's I know like
firsthand, even from like teammates
fighting, how scary it is for me to be
in attendance. So, I would never like
drag along someone who loves me because
it's it's horrendous to be honest with
you. Like, it's such an unpredictable
sport that
you just never know. So, but I think my
mom came because I was like, "Look, Mom,
I don't want to tell you to come or not
come, but this is probably the only time
I'm ever going to fight in Manchester.
Like, I don't know how many fights I've
got left. And I'm I'm under the notion
that I would rather retire a little bit
too early than a little bit too late
because I've seen the way people get
late in the career. And I don't I don't
want to be like that. So I'm not saying
I'm going to retire anytime soon. But
I'm just saying like most of my fights
are in the US now and I don't think
you'll ever have a chance to see me
fight live again. So I think you should
come to this one. And uh she came and
apparently she enjoyed it. Um, as you're
talking about the role that martial arts
has played in your life, it got me
thinking about about young men in
general because young men in general
seem to be really struggling at the
moment when we look at a lot of the
statistics around like suicidal
ideiation and purposelessness and um it
made me as you were speaking I was like
damn I need to do martial arts. So if
there is young men listening to this
that are struggling in their lives in
any way, what advice would you give them
in terms of martial arts or those early
life decisions or even later life
decisions about you know something that
they can do to find that sense of
purpose that you so clearly found?
I mean let me first of all start by
saying I would be completely lost
without it. I think everybody should do
it honestly because I think that
it puts your ego in check massively
because you constantly like every time
you step onto a mat to train you're
getting a you're getting hit in the face
with reality constantly and if you
haven't been
like for me it's like you're getting hit
in the face with reality and if you're
not consistent that reality will hit you
harder and harder each time. So it
creates a sense of like purpose in your
life. You're almost like scared. It's
not it's not fear, but it's like you
don't want to miss because you don't
want to get hit with the reality. Like
you don't want to be inconsistent with
your training because you don't want to
be hit harder by the reality next time
you go. If that makes sense. Makes
perfect sense. I just think that it
gives you just a massive structure in
your life. Not only that, not not to
mention the stuff like look, I'm not
going to sit here and talk about crime
rates or anything like that because I
don't know the the statistics, but I
know that in this country especially,
crime is pretty high right now. Mhm. So,
my friend who's come with me who's
upstairs, Charlie, he does my social
media and he's also a close close friend
of mine as well and he's a similar age
to me. is 32 and he's literally just
started training because I literally
said to him like Charlie I say this to
everybody who's not involved in martial
arts
if you need to and I'm not saying you
need to be a world champion you need to
train every but you need to have a
general idea of how to defend yourself
if it ever happens like you don't need
to be good you don't need to have a
fight you don't need to be preparing to
fight someone in a ring in a cage or
whatever but I think everybody should be
comfortable with the general eneral idea
of how to defend theel if they need to.
Whether that be if you own a house, if
you have children, if you have a
girlfriend or a boyfriend or whatever,
if you have somebody who you might need
to protect who can't protect the self or
something that you might need to
protect, you need to have some kind of
idea on on how to protect that in my
that's that's my opinion. Um because
fighting is a scary thing at the best.
It's like I'm the number one heavyweight
in the world right now and I'm scared to
fight somebody. So, like I wouldn't like
to be completely clueless because it
must be so scary and I think that it
would be I I would recommend it to
anybody of any age to do some kind of
martial arts. So, there's a couple of
things you said there which I'm most
certainly going to ask you about. The
first thing you said was about how
martial arts brings the consequence of
like a lack of discipline Yeah. up close
but also increases the consequence. And
I was I was thinking as you were saying
that I was thinking, "Oh my god, this is
so true." Because if I if I'm a
18-year-old guy and I'm sat this on the
sofa at home doing nothing with my life,
the consequence of that is quite hard to
see in the short term. What you're
saying is by doing martial arts, the
consequence becomes weekly and becomes
you're going to get your [__] nose
broken. Yeah. So, so that's motivating
to get you get your life together. And
then the other thing you said is I'm the
number one in the world and even I'm
scared to fight somebody. Yeah. Who?
Who? Yeah. Everybody.
I don't want to fight anybody. I don't I
mean I want to fight professionally. I
love doing that. But I mean as far as
like a a confrontation with somebody.
That's the last thing I'm trying to do.
I don't want to do that with anybody. So
you weren't saying that you're scared to
fight a particular person. Well, yeah.
Yeah. I mean Yeah. I'm scared to fight
everybody. Yeah. And I think that that
for for professional
combat athletes across the board,
whether that's boxing, kickboxing,
wrestling, MMA, whatever you're into, I
think that's like a very very uh taboo
subject is like fear because everybody
wants to be this like big like I'm a
freaking 6'5,
115 kilo guy with like cauliflower ears
and everything like tattoos and the
whole lot. It's pretty difficult to sit
here and say like I'm scared to fight
anybody and like have that and be and be
literally the number one heavyweight in
the world. But kind of the realization
of the fear that I've got
now that I understand fear and what it
is and what it does for me, it just
fuels me so much to do what I do. In
MMA, we have terms like a gym warrior.
people call it like a someone who spars
in the gym really really well and then
they get under the lights and they don't
fight anywhere near what they do in the
gym. Now, generally speaking, that is
because they don't understand fear
properly. And I think I've got in a
place where I completely understand that
fear fuels me in a way that nothing else
can fuel me and I'm completely
comfortable with it. I'm super intrigued
by this. So I want to talk about this um
this idea of fear but also the journey
that you've been on with fear. Yeah. So
have you always been fearful to fight
people? Yeah. And I think that if you're
not, you're either lying to yourself or
you're a complete idiot. Yeah. I think I
think
if you are going to sit in an arena and
the arena's packed to the rims with 20
plus thousand people and there's another
guy over the other side of the arena
waiting to fight you who's trained for
the last 10 weeks and you've got to meet
him in the center of the octagon with
millions of people watching around the
world and know that you can get
separated from your own consciousness
and you're not scared. You're either
lying to yourself or you're just a
complete idiot with your mom watching
for the first time ever.
Yeah. I mean,
I see you guys do the walk outs and I'm
just like,
wow. Yeah, it's crazy. It's hard to ever
comment on someone being good or bad at
something that it takes that much
courage to do that I've clearly not
demonstrated in my own life. So, so
fear. So, you've always been scared to
you've always had fear when faced with
an opponent, but you also alluded to the
fact that there's work that you've done
to overcome that fear or to put it into
perspective, I guess. Yeah. What's that
work? The the gym warrior and the guy
who's under the lights is can be two
different people. And I've seen it a lot
over the years. I've seen it so much.
Um, still see it now. Still see it all
the time. See, when you train, this is
this is my personal opinion. This is not
fact, but this is my personal opinion.
I would say the training aspect is
probably around 80% physical and 20%
mental. The training aspect
on fight night when you are in that
arena and you are you have got them
bright lights beaming down on you and
you can hear the crowd going crazy and
you know that there's millions of people
watching you. You've got them tiny
gloves on. There's another massive guy
stood across from you with his shirt
off. I believe it completely flips and
becomes about 80 plus% mental. I
remember somebody, I actually can't
remember who it was, it might have even
been on a podcast or something saying,
"Look, we spend all this time preparing
physically because to be an MMA fighter,
you have to dedicate a lot of time, and
I mean a lot of time to preparing
physically." So that that can be
you know I train around about between
three and five hours a day possibly on
the physical training and that's not to
mention the stretching, the eating, the
sleeping, the physio,
the sauners, the all the other stuff
that comes with becoming a good athlete.
So I'm probably dedicating a solid
most of the 24 hours a day if you're
going to count sleeping as well, which I
believe is a part of being a
professional athlete
is dedicated to me becoming the best
version an athlete of myself as
possible. Now you're dedicating all that
time to training physically.
How much are you dedicating to mental
the mental aspect? And if you would ask
most fighters, especially at the top
level, you're talking top 10 guys in the
world, what do you think is the most
important aspect, the physical side or
the mental side? I will guarantee at
least 50% of them guys would say the
mental side. Now, if you're comparing
mental and physical, we're spending this
much time on the physical side, but this
much time on the mental side, next to
nothing. And uh I could see a massive
discrepancy in that. And I wanted to
bring the bring the mental side up. So
you're in the mental gym, too. Oh, all
the time. And what is that? A lot of uh
a lot of visualization. Okay. So, talk
me through this. Give me I want as much
detail as possible. Okay. Okay. So, I
work with a hypnotherapist, which I
think is very important. Yeah. I write
stuff down.
I have stuff where I can see it. I'll
look at that a lot. Even stuff like I'm
just a massive daydreamer. massive
daydreamer
and
I can just see in my mind clearly this
is something that's programmed into me
for years and years and it's almost like
mental see in MMA we have a term and I
don't know if this goes across the board
but we call it drilling so like if
there's a technique if you're practicing
like a want to and you're doing it
repeatedly you call it drilling you're
drilling a want to drilling is like
repetition repetition I like mentally
drill situations so when you're talking
about the walk out. When I'm physically
walking out mentally, I've walked out
10,000 times before I've actually
physically walked out. So, by the time
I'm there physically, I've been there so
many times mentally that it feels quite
quite normal to me. And then I
constantly tell myself that I got to
enjoy it because I'm completely aware
now, especially
I'm closer to the end than I am the
beginning now. Definitely. I don't know
when I'm going to retire. I have no
plans to retire right now, but I'm
definitely close to the end than I am
the beginning. And the moments that we
have, these walk out moments, these fear
moments of being stood in the cage with
another guy who stood in the cage with
me. And we know that once these
officials get out of the ring and they
close that cage, we are going to fight
and someone is going to win and
someone's going to lose. Like those are
really special moments and you have to
enjoy them because when I'm 60 years old
and I hopefully I've got grandkids and I
can I want to be telling them about
these special moments and not wishing
them away and really really enjoying
them. And that's something that mentally
I try and practice being in the moment
and enjoying it a lot. And I feel like a
lot of fighters they just
they're just so stressed about the end
result that they can't even focus on
enjoying the self in the right now. And
I know for me personally
when I'm enjoying myself that's when I
do my best. So I want to enjoy myself. I
want to talk to you about a few things
you said there. You talked about
visualization was what you mentioned
first and writing things down. What kind
of things do you write down and like
what what's your pro your whole process
there? Cuz I'm sure there's people at
home that would love to understand some
of these practices so that they can
implement them in their own life and
then also speak to the the value that
it's brought to your life doing these
kind of things. You talk about
visualization. People think about this
like weird woo woo kind of thing. Sit
sitting there with crystals on you and
weird music and meditate. It's not like
that. It's as simple as getting a piece
of paper, writing down this week I will
do this and enjoy it. That as simple as
that. That that's all I do. This year I
will win two fights. I will enjoy both
of them and I will perform to my best.
And just reading it every so often. And
how often do you do that? Is it
something you do at the start of the
year or is it just like sporadically?
really I'm not it's not something I I'm
not the kind of guy who goes right the
beginning of the year this is my uh
visualization board or anything like
that. Not that there's anything wrong
with that. That's just not what I do
personally. I just write when I feel
like writing stuff I'll write it and
most of the time I've got it in my
bedside table or I've got it somewhere
that I can see it and I'll pick it up.
I'll read it a few times the same
sentence. I'll put it down and I feel
like it's in there. I wrote recently
that things are working for me.
because I'm in a really weird situation
with my career that I've never really
been before
where um there's a lot of politics
involved in my my kind of next move with
John Jones. Yeah. I think I said to you
like off camera he's like usually it's
like right get off at the fight work
towards the fight
fight's over little bit of downtime
another fight work towards that fight
over blah blah blah. Whereas now I'm
just kind of like a little bit in limbo
when I don't know what's happening and
I'm just like ah usually I'm used to
like having my life mapped out as to
when I need to dedicate more time to
this and how much what training partners
coming there and what I need to focus
on. But now I'm just in a little bit
limbo where I don't know really what's
going on and I wanted to really write
down just to solidify that
all this is happening cuz I think when
when you are in those kind of situations
I know me personally I start to like
conspire in my own like that everyone's
conspiring against me like oh this is
not working out for me and I start
thinking negatively but I think
sometimes you just got to write down
like this is going to be all right like
this is whatever's happening right now I
don't know what it is and I I don't
know. I can't fix it personally cuz it's
nothing to do with me, but I know that
it's going to work. It's going to end up
all right and it's going to work out for
me. So, a couple of weeks ago, I
remember just writing that down, putting
it in the thing next to my bed. And uh
sometimes when I'm waking up, I'm
feeling a bit stressed. I'll just read
it, put it away, and then that's it. So,
any moment, maybe today, maybe now,
maybe your phone upstairs could have a
text message on it from Dana White
saying, "We're good to go." Yeah, pretty
much. I am now like training. I'm I
mean, I'm always training anyway.
training is a massive part of my life,
but I could get a text at any moment
telling me I'm gonna fight in six weeks
and that would be amazing. Um, and it
would be the biggest fight of all time.
Yeah, but I don't think that's going to
happen because they are giving it that
it's the definitely in my opinion
there's a few massive fights to be made
at the moment in MMA. Uh, but I think as
far as thirst from fans, this is the one
that people want to see the most. Um,
when I say that, does it make you
nervous? Uh everything I just said when
I said it was the biggest fight of all
time. I love it. Yeah. Yeah. That's what
I want to do. Yeah. That's what I want
to be involved with. Yeah. That's that's
why we do this thing. We don't like I
have had a lot of fights
that nobody cared about in all honesty.
Like I've had a lot of fights. I think
don't people don't realize like they see
me and other guys at the top of the
division. You know, we're traveling the
world. We're making money. We're winning
titles. We're doing all this good stuff.
Honestly, most of my fights there was a
hundred people there and I came away
with 100 quid cash and nobody gave a
[__] either way. Yeah, that's uh and
that's that's the realization of it.
Like MMA is such a tough sport to like a
lot of kids, not a lot of kids, but a
lot of parents if I meet a parent on the
street whose kids involved in MMA or
whatever, a lot of the time will say
like, "Oh, what advice have you got
for?"
And in all honesty, a lot of the time
I'm like have a backup plan because it's
so difficult to make any money out of uh
or any like I was saying I'm going to an
event tomorrow actually. It's a local
show. I was a amateur champion on the
show. It's a great show. Do you know
what I mean? There'll be there'll be a
couple of thousand people there tomorrow
and it's a there's got a big fight card.
Like there's maybe 20 fights on. So
there's 40 fighters fighting tomorrow
night. I'm going to it. And uh I was
chatting to to my friend last night
actually said, "Oh, is there anyone uh
decent on the couch?" "Yeah, yeah,
there's a couple of guys on." And he
said, "Oh, will will anybody go to the
UFC?" And we just got chatting about
that and and how that looks and how it
looks to get in the UFC. And and I said
to be honest with you, if one person out
of the 40 can buy a house from MMA,
I would be very surprised. And that's
one in 40 decent level. Like it's just
so hard to make a living out I've ever
made. There is absolutely no career path
to doing it really, especially in this
country. Like it's getting tougher and
tougher. And I'm trying to I'm trying to
raise as much awareness about MMA as
possible. I want kids to be able to look
at guys like me and other guys and be
like, if he's making a career out of it,
I can. But it is so hard in this
country. That's why I'm doing as much as
I can to try and get this thing as
mainstream as possible. I mean, even in
the UK, if I think there's been what,
hundreds of thousands of kids that
probably practiced MMA over the last
couple of years, and how many of them
really get to the point where they could
buy a house from it, you know, you can
name them like, you Conor McGregor, Ian
Garry, Patty Pimlet, Leon Edwards. I
mean, there there's definitely guys who
who have made a lot of money out of it
and and have a good living, but
honestly, like I've been around gyms all
my life, and I would say 95% of people
have never made more than five grand for
a fight. How much were you getting paid
throughout your amateur career? Cuz you
were an amateur fighter up until the
point where you basically ran out of
people you could fight. Y um I think you
had nine amateur fights, right? Nine,
which at the time was quite a lot. I
would always recommend get as much as
much experience as you can as an amateur
before you move on to pro. But yeah, so
as as an amateur, I was obviously
getting ticket money. So I'd sell sell
So the way it worked when I was fighting
as an amateur at least it was like if
you would sell a ticket for 30 quid, you
would get a fiverr of it. So the the
promoters would work off that like a
little percentage thing going. So of
those nine amateur fights, how much you
think you all together?
I was maybe making between 50 and 100
quid a fight. Okay. Okay. So, that's
nearly a grand. Yeah. Nearly. Yeah.
Nearly a grand on that. And then you
went you had a professional run as well.
Was it seven fights as a professional in
MMA?
Before I got to the I have no idea.
Before I got to the UFC, probably Yeah,
maybe seven. Yeah. Down as seven. So, I
remember my first pro fight, I got 200
quid. Okay. So, you you doubled doubled
it. Smashing it. I was absolutely
smashing it then. So, so that's Yeah.
Another So, you probably made two grand
or something there. And then the UFC
pays much better. Much better. much
better, which is when you can start to
make a living from it. Yeah. I mean,
they start off pretty good. Uh the thing
I'm really lucky in the fact that I've
got a fan friendly style, so people want
to see me fight, especially
heavyweights. People want to see a lot a
lot of the people like who are not
they've not got a technically trained
eye. They want to see two guys punching
each other and one guy unconscious. That
that's that's the brutality of it. And
that's the that's the reality of it. And
my style, generally speaking, brings
that. Well, I mean, generally speaking,
don't you hold the world record for the
average fastest time I do. Yeah. That a
fight ends. Yes. Yeah. Which is pretty
crazy. So, I mean, that's why you're
such a draw, right? Cuz you're knocking
everyone out within 2 minutes on
average. Yep. Yeah. So,
like you I progress through contracts
and money quite quickly because of my
style, but not everybody does. So,
generally speaking, you get in the UFC,
you get what's called show money, which
is your money to show up, which is what
what can you tell me? Usually, it's 10
grand. Yeah. Dollars. Yeah.
And I mean, people's contracts are
different, but I'm just speaking
generally. People start off at 10 and
10. They get show money, win money. So,
generally speaking, and this this varies
amongst, you know, if someone's got a
career in another big organization,
sometimes they'll sign him for more than
that, but I was coming off a regional
show, so I I think I I either got 10 and
10 or 12 and 12, I can't remember. But
generally speaking, it's like you get
your show money, which is between 10 and
15k dollars, and then your win bonus is
double your show money usually. So, 10
and 10, 12 and 12, 15. How long are you
on that contract? They usually do four
fights. Okay. But the thing is they can
terminate that at any time. So if you're
in like a fight that's boring, it's a
bit of a stinker. Even if you win, they
can just be like, "Yeah, we're done.
Done with that." Interesting. Yeah. So
if it's four fights, you're getting 10
and 10. You could earn that's 80k. If
you win, you usually go up. So it' be
like 10 and 10, 12 and 12, 14 and 14, 16
and 16, something like that. Okay. The
low end is you could make 80K from those
first. Yeah. But if you lose, you're
just getting 10. That's the uh Oh, yeah.
You can make 40K. Yeah. And generally
speaking, like if you go 10 and 10, you
win. You go 12 and 12, you win. You go
14 and 14, but you lose that one, you go
back to 12 and 12. Does that make sense?
Okay. But if you have an exciting style
and the UFC like you, see, I'm very
lucky because I'm from the UK and people
from the UK get behind the fighters a
lot of the time and I'm very lucky that
I've got that myself. So I did
10 and 10 and then I think
12 and 12 if I remember rightly. And
then they resigned me then because I had
two first round finishes. Oh. So they
resigned me for a bigger contract then
which was great. And then I they sign me
for another four fights and then you
know you win a couple more in exciting
fashion and you can you can get bigger
contracts. You don't have to stay for
the four. So after two fights you got a
new deal. Yes. And that drastically
changes the money. Yes. Yeah. Like from
still in the tens. Still in the tens.
Yeah. Bigger tens. 50s. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Cuz I thought it was 50. I thought
that I thought um someone like Ian Gary
who came in from uh what's the
organization he came in? Cage Warriors.
Cage Warriors. I also came in from Cage
Warriors. Oh, okay. So he must have been
I thought he was on 50. I mean he might
have been he might have been like yeah
maybe he was I don't know like I say it
varies from person to person but from my
experience I came in is either 10 and 10
or 12 and 12. I can't remember exactly.
And when does the big the big like six
figure show money begin? So
I got a a good contract because I took
the title fight on two weeks notice. So
I was in a bit of a position there where
like I could kind of like save the card
because there was a title fight on the
card. Somebody pulled out. They asked me
to step in. So you know I was in a
position that the UFC was kind kind of
like needed me a little bit then. So um
but to answer the question, everyone's
different with that. But with the money
aspect, it's like when you start
becoming popular and winning fights that
when people want to see you basically.
That's it's just as much about do people
want to watch you fight. That's that's
like a bit it's not just about winning
fights. Winning fights is extremely
important, but
you you got to make people want to see
you. So that was against Ser Sergey
Pavlovich. That's right. In that was in
the the end of 2023. Yes. November. And
that was your first six figure payday
because you took that massive fight on
short notice. Yes. It was your biggest
payday? It was my biggest paid uh at the
time. I got a bigger one in my last
fight. Oh, but it was your biggest
payday up until that point? By far. By
far. By far. By how much far? By more
than double. More than double. Okay. And
that was a six figure payday. Yes. Okay.
The reason why that's so surprising and
interesting is because you were fighting
at that point for the interim
heavyweight title. Yeah.
So, I'm thinking about those kids back
in Sulford. Yeah. And if they if they
want to get a life-threatening six
figure, cuz that's what it is. Six
figure payday. Then the journey that you
went on is from the age of what? Seven
years old. You started seven, eight,
something like that. Yeah. Till you were
30 years old. Yeah. So, 23 years for you
to get a six figure payday from a
heavyweight UFC title. It's a long time.
It's a lot of work. Yeah, it's a whole
lot of work. Yeah. I was thinking about
your story arc and if if you were to
like paint it on a graph, like draw on a
graph. Am I right in thinking it's like
slow, flat, and then quite sudden? Oh,
yeah. There's a lot Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. There's there's a lot of that gone
on. They say, don't they something like
it takes years to to become an overnight
success or whatever. And that's exactly
what I'm dealing with. Yeah. Yeah. It's
crazy. Like you say, I've been going
since I was 8 years old. And the stuff
that I've gone through in that time is
unbelie I'm a massive believer in like
just outlasting people like just being
consistent and outlasting people a lot
of the time overtakes
anything else like there's so many times
and a lot of it is down to my dad as
well is like I've wanted to quit and
he's just remind don't get me wrong I I
have quit a couple of times uh with MMA
and uh it's been like, "Tom, I think you
really need to think about this because
you've been spending your whole life
doing it. Like, don't quit now." You
know what I mean? Like, there's been a
lot of that from my dad. And, uh, I
think a lot of other dads would have
just been like, "Yeah, you've done
enough now. You've tried your best. Just
leave it at that." Whereas, it's always
been, you know, my dad's always believed
in me. Uh, and my mom as well, not not
just my dad. And a lot of close people
around me as to be honest. I'm very
lucky in that regard that uh people have
pushed me to continue which is great.
When was the first time you quit? I've
quit quite a lot of times mate to be
honest.
A lot of different reasons. Um so many
of the reasons injuries. Yeah. Tough.
Very very very tough to deal with
injuries as a professional athlete. Not
getting regular fights is also tough.
See now I'm like was complaining to you
a minute ago about I've not got a fight
this that and the other. But I'm going
to get a fight. the the thirst from the
fans is there that the UFC want me to
fight. I've got a belt I got to defend.
We got to unify this. There's there's
millions of dollars at stake here. Like
I'm gonna fight soon. I don't know when
it's going to be. But at one point,
nobody cared if I fought or not. And I
had no money. And that that I think the
the toughest time for me was so I I had
my first kid when I was 23. Wife was
pregnant when she was 22. When we were
22 and first kid at 23.
And then when I was 24, we found out
that she was pregnant again and which
I'm very happy about, of course. I don't
want to seem like it's a negative thing.
And that we're having twins.
And
we had the twins. Everything's great.
And I had no money. And I mean, I didn't
have any money at all. And I'm like
living on this dream of
me
becoming this global superstar with
these millions of pounds in the bank and
with these titles and travel. I'm living
on that dream,
but I'm in Athen Greater Manchester.
It's raining outside. I can't afford to
put fuel in my car and I've got three
kids upstairs crying. Do you know what I
mean? That that's that's what I was on.
And I really felt like at the time
I don't I don't want to say like I'm
some big masculine guy or anything, but
I felt a little bit demasculated if
that's all right. I felt like I'm here
with this wife and kids and I ain't
providing nothing like and that was
really tough for me mentally at that
time where I'm like how am I going to
provide for all these people like I got
to do something else because and I felt
I don't think that people around me were
like
Tom's living in a dream world he needs
to get a proper job and earn some money
for his family and kids. I don't think
people cuz there was a lot of people
around me who actually believe believed
in the dream as well which is amazing
but I felt the pressure I felt like
people felt like that a little bit even
if they weren't saying it. So uh that I
think for me was the the toughest time
for me I think is when just after I've
had my kids I'm away training every day.
I'm I'm barely spending any time at the
at home. When I am spending time at home
I'm completely exhausted from training.
The kids have me up all the time.
They're crying. My wife's not happy.
I've got no money. I train all this
time, go to fight, then it gets canceled
a week before. Do you know what I mean?
That was really, really tough to deal
with at the time. How do you from a
mental health perspective, how how were
you during that season of life? Not
great. Very, very tough. I think
first of all,
I mean, everybody's different, but
having three kids at the age of 25 is
quite tough. I don't think I was well I
wouldn't change it for the world. I
absolutely love being a dad. Love my
kids to death. They're the most
important thing in my life. Um I
wouldn't change it for the world. But I
think now looking back of me like seven
years ago having three children. I don't
know how I did it. It was really really
tough. Like I think that's really young
and like I was very underdeveloped
mentally to have that kind of
responsibility and raise children and a
family and a house and have a wife and
try and get my career off the ground.
Like it was really really tough at the
time. So I think I was just in survival
mode to be honest with you. Actually
it's funny you should say cuz I've been
having these conversations recently with
a couple of friends. He's like my friend
now is having twins. He's just found
out. He asked me, "What's it like?" And
I said, "To be honest with you, and I'm
going to be really honest because I I
pride myself as a nice person. It was
the hardest thing I've ever done. I
can't even remember the first year. And
I can't because it was so difficult."
And it wasn't just the twins. It was
also
the money situation, fact is not going
anywhere, the stress I was under, just
the trying to be a young guy, but having
all this responsibility on me. But like
I said, I absolutely wouldn't change it
for the world. It's it's literally
shaped me into the person that I am
today, and I'm really really proud of
where I am now. But uh at the time, it
it was very tough for me mentally. Was
there was there a hardest moment that
you reflect on? Cuz sometimes when we
think back to our lives, we can remember
like a vivid rock bottom where something
happened, we went to put petrol in the
car or and or when we we were alone and
our mind started saying dark things to
us. Was there a rock bottom in that
period of life?
I don't I I was still like aware of how
um lucky I was to have like three
beautiful children and and still be
chasing the dream that I was on, but I
think I just hated owing anybody money.
Like I felt like I just hate going to
people and asking them for money. Like
that was like my worst nightmare. And I
had to lend like borrow a lot of money
off my dad. uh to borrow some money off
friends just to put fuel in the car to
get to the gym to be living in what I
thought at the time was like a
makebelieve I I didn't think it was a
makebelieve dream but I think I feel
like the people on the outside thought
what is he doing like what is this guy
doing like he needs to like look after
his family like I felt I felt that a lot
and a lot of that might have just been
in my own psyche to be honest with you a
lot of it I don't think came from my
close circle but I remember like having
to borrow money from friends to like put
fuel in my car, buy nappies for my kids
and stuff like that just so I can like
keep living on this dream of having a
fight in 6 weeks, getting 600 quid and
being able to give him 20 quid back.
Like that was it's to it was tough. Does
that not put a lot of pressure on the
relationship? Cuz I mean, bloody hell,
relationships are hard enough without
twins, another child, um, and everything
else that makes life in relationships
difficult. So, it's quite remarkable
that, you know, being in a relationship
is not easy in in any in any
in any in any regard. Being in a
relationship and sharing your life with
somebody isn't easy. Um,
yeah, it did. It did. But, you know
what? We got through it and we're really
strong and I'm really uh happy with the
family unit that we've built. I try and
be the best dad that I can be. Like,
that's more important than anything else
to me. Um, is just spending time and
making my kids um as good as I can. And
I'm aware that as a dad and as a parent,
you can't
control as such what your kids, you
can't mold a kid into what you want it
to be. You can't say like cuz I got
three kids and they're all completely
different. They're all brought up
exactly the same, but they're all
completely different. And you can never
say this is what my kid's going to be
and this is who he's going to be and how
he's going to be. But just to be able to
hopefully bring some kind of positive
outlook on their life and and hopefully
give them a positive experience on this
earth is uh what I'm looking to do. Your
your partner, you're married to Justina.
Yeah. Did she understand? Oh, she
understands more than anybody. Yeah.
Absolutely. Yeah. If it wasn't for her,
my dad, my mom, couple of friends
around, I would have been Yeah. I would
have been a mess. Absolute mess. Yeah.
She was very understanding because I
know that most women
they would have been putting the
pressure on big time. Yeah, she was it's
because when we met I've been with her
since I was 19. She was 19 also were the
same age. Um that was my dream from the
beginning. So she like got on board with
that. Um and she's kept me she's stopped
me from quitting a lot of times as well.
She stopped me from quitting so many
times. Yeah. is this sport's tough and
like I said there's no so in football
for example I know a little bit about
football
you start from a grassroots team as a
kid then you go to an academy and then
you can get signed at the age of like 12
13 and start playing for the under 13s
and professional club and there's a
place where you can go and obviously
football's a tough game they can cut you
off like that as well but at least
there's a career path of what you're
going to do and where you're going to go
whereas MMA you're basically shooting in
the dark for 95% of it Um, and I'm very
lucky to have people like my wife, my
family, my uh mom and dad, and the
people around me who believe in me as
well. Yeah, it's I mean, we started
talking about this because of that that
kind of graph of your career where it's
kind of flat relative to what then
happened and then quick all of a sudden.
And even when you think about the
financials, it's like very very little.
And then if you get all the right forces
behind you in terms of like personality
and timing and then someone drops out
here, you get the interim shot, you win,
then things take off. And that is it's
also remarkable to me that it's happened
in such a short period of time. Um
relative to how long you've been doing
this because yeah, when I looked down
and I saw that this was 2023. Yes. But
you got that shot, you're kind of a new
face on the scene to some degree
relative to some of some of these other
guys. Yeah, definitely. Definitely. I
think the new generation is definitely
coming in now in in uh like the old
guard, the old champions are kind of
they're at the back end of the career
and now it's time for um new guys which
is that's progression. That's that's
great. Quick one. I want to talk about
something we all need to take seriously
which is cyber security. Whether you're
a first-time founder facing your very
first audit or a seasoned professional
who's been through it all, staying
compliant is getting more critical than
ever and more complicated I have to say.
And that is where Vanta comes in, who is
a sponsor of this podcast. Vanta takes
the pain out of security compliance,
automating the tedious but essential
process of proving your business is
secure across over 35 frameworks like
SOCK 2, ISO 2701.
Centralize your workflows, answer
security questions up to five times
faster, and protect your business
without losing focus on growth. And this
is really a critical part of this. A new
IDC white paper found that companies
using Vant save over $535,000
a year and it pays for itself in just 3
months. For a limited time, my community
gets $1,000 off Vanta at
vanta.com/stephven.
That's van.com/stephven
for $1,000 off.
So Tom, there's this black box in front
of me which um contains something which
represents a pivotal moment in your
career. What is in the box? We remove
the belt. I mean, it's not I'll be
honest, mate. It's not that exciting.
Interesting. It probably stinks as well.
You probably smell it from over there.
I'm okay. It's clean. It's clean,
actually. It's not too bad. This is a
This is a knee pad. Okay. I
What is the story behind the knee pad?
Why did you bring that? So,
first of all, I've had a knee problem
for a long time. I started the knee
problem when we were talking about the
things that we've just been talking
about, the financial struggles, and I
knew that I was never kind of like one,
two fights away from getting to the UFC.
So, I wanted to train through the knee
problems. Then I got to the UFC.
I'm training. I I fight, I win. Oh, my
knees knees all right. I'm doing like
I'm doing pretty well here. like I can
fight with one knee, fight again, I win.
Then I get a new contract and then I
fight, they offer me another fight. I
don't want to say no to the UFC. I'm on
this roll. I've still got this bad knee.
I'm training with one leg. And you're
training with one leg? Yeah, I train
with one leg for a long time. Yeah,
pretty much. I never kicked with the
leg. I never went on the knee ever or
anything like that. Anyway, this kept
going and going. I was fighting with one
leg.
Then the most devastating thing that
happened in my whole career was my knee
just give out in front of 25,000
home fans in the Ult arena in London
in what was a title eliminator fight. So
if either of us would have won that
fight, we would have got a title shot
next. So it's a massive fight with with
title implications.
And not only did I lose the fight
because of the injury, uh losing the
fight is one thing. Like if I go in
there, I have a good fight, I I show off
all my training, but I get knocked out,
for example. Like even though I'm going
to be sad that I've lost the fight, I am
relatively satisfied that I went in
there,
I had a go, came up short. Like I I can
live with that.
Whereas with the knee, I went in there,
got injured straight away. The knee was
down. I couldn't walk. I had surgery and
then I was unsure whether my career was
going to be over or not. And that was a
massive massive turning point in um in
my life. Not just in my career, but in
my life. um that really really gave me a
chance to think and slow down and figure
out what's important and what isn't. And
uh that all came because of one of the
biggest worst thing that's happened in
my life, but one of the most important
things as well. And one of the I got the
most growth from that knee injury than
I've got from anything else in my life,
I think. What kind of growth emerged
from that? At the time, I was doing a
lot of things wrong in my personal life
and in my professional life. like I had
a lot of people around me that shouldn't
have been there. I was doing some
training sessions and training with
people that I shouldn't have really been
training with. Um
I wasn't living a good lifestyle in
terms of diet and my recovery. I wasn't
100% focused and I should have been but
because everything was going so well and
I'm a little bit
uh what's like superstitious. I didn't
want to change anything because I'm like
well it's going well. I don't want to
start changing it. And I knew that there
was a lot of things wrong. I knew that
there were people that I shouldn't have
been surrounding myself with. I knew
that there were training sessions that
were just wasting my time really. And
there were um toxic people around me
that shouldn't have been there. And and
I need they needed to go, but I didn't
want to change everything because it was
all going so well. And when when you
talk about like a rock bottom moment,
when you sat on the floor of the UFC
octagon in the old arena with your leg
up in the air and there's 25,000 people
who are there for you um start leaving
the building, it's a bad feeling. It's a
really bad feeling. So that really rate
made me like reassess um some of the the
decisions I was making at the time. and
the Tom Aspenol before and after that
moment completely different people. I
feel like I completely rebuilt myself,
not only physically cuz I think you can
look you can look at me physically in
fights before and see a physical change
just in terms of my physique and the way
I'm moving around. Obviously I had one
leg before and I've got two legs now
which is way better. But mentally the
growth has been enormous is that I
completely cut out anything negative
that was in my life. Anything that
wasn't anything or anyone that wasn't
serving me to become like run parallel
with my journey to becoming the best
heavyweight in the world I completely
cut off and because because I was so
superstitious I think. But but why
why did you why was it so important for
you to remove those people at that
particular moment? As an athlete, I
needed to and not only as an athlete, as
as a as a man, I needed to really slow
down cuz I was on this like fast track.
It's like I got in the UFC and it was
just like fight fight fight and every
time it's like more and more popular,
more interviews, more media, more fame,
more money, more this that and and I
didn't really have time to like assess
really what was around me and I didn't
have time to like start cutting people
off and start changing this and tweaking
this and doing I just didn't see it
because I was on this like I was just
going and going and going and when I had
that and next minute I'm sat on the
couch for six months with this big cut
on my I can't walk. I'm doing physio and
doing all the rest of it. And um yeah, I
just feel like as an athlete and a man,
I really had that time to slow down and
and really assess my life and be like,
"This isn't working. It needs to
change." That was actually the closest
point where I was pretty close to
throwing in the towel then to be honest
on my career because
at that point I'd not made like mega
money or anything but I'd made enough
money to like be comfortable and
I bought a house at that time. I'd made
some decent money, but nothing like
life-changing. But I'd made enough money
to then,
I don't know, be living my life to an
all right, you know, standard for
however long. Um, I was like, well, I'm
financially comfortable now. I've had
some fights in the UFC. I've had some
success. I was I think I was just
outside the top five at that time or
something, maybe top 10. You know, I've
gone way further than a lot of people
have done. Maybe I'll just like leave it
there. Was there an element of you that
wondered if the public would ever want
to see you again? Oh, of course. Yeah.
Yeah. Of course. Yeah, definitely.
Because I didn't have an actual fight. I
felt like people thought I faked the
injury or something. So, I think like a
lot of people thought, yeah, he didn't
he didn't really want to be in there
with that opponent. I felt because
especially my opponent at the time,
Curtis Blaze, he was like running
through everybody. Um, and I felt like a
lot of people were like Tom just didn't
want to fight. So I felt like very
insecure about myself at the time and I
really like when I came back I really
had like a chip on my shoulder and I
still got it that like I want to I want
to prove to everybody that like I'm the
best heavyweight in the world. You got
six months on the sofa. Did you read
things people are saying? I tried not to
but I always do.
I try not to but um yeah but I think I
think it's quite healthy in a way though
as well. I think it that fueled me a lot
as well is that people started quitting
on me and stuff and a lot of people even
like people were like yeah you know you
got a lot of ways to make money now like
you've already done loads of media you
know you're good you're good on the mic
and stuff you can maybe be a pundit and
stuff like that for a time I was like
yeah maybe I can maybe I can just like
you know be a pundit and you know I've
been in there I've main evented a couple
of times and stuff I've been fought
almost the elite level yeah maybe I
maybe I can just do that but And I
started reading these negative comments
and I was like actually I want to fight
like what what is this? Well, like where
am I going? I'm letting these regular
people like speak like talk to me and
and put regular thoughts in my mind and
I'm not a regular person. So, I'm I'm an
elite special athlete and I always have
that belief in myself that I'm not
regular and I don't want to be regular
and I can't let regular people tell me
how to uh how to function. And I was
almost at the point where I were I was
letting regular people tell me how to
function. And the the the kind of like
online haters spurred me to be like,
nah, I've got to I've got to come back
and win this sit. there's no chance this
is going to be the end of me. Did it
knock your confidence at all even though
even though the nature of the loss and
it's your first and only loss in the UFC
and you went on to beat this guy in a
rematch. Um did it knock your confidence
at all even though it was via injury?
Yeah. No. No. Because I was really
particular that
so there was two things that I really
wanted to do after the fight. So I lost
to a guy called uh Curtis Blades. That's
when I injured my knee in 15 seconds. In
15 seconds. Yeah. Right at the beginning
of the fight. So I wanted to fight
Curtis again. That that was really
important to me is that I fight him
again because
I can't function as a human being
knowing that I trained for a fight and
didn't actually fight somebody. If I
would have lost, at least I can like
look myself in the mirror and be like, I
tried my best. That's all I can do. But
I I seriously had unfinished business.
And the other thing was that the injury
happened at the Alter Arena,
which from anyone from the UK knows that
that is like a prestigious ar like if
you're if you're a UFC fighter and
you're English, you want to fight at the
O2, especially headline the O2. That's
unbelievable experience. And I couldn't
then never fight at the O2 Arena again.
I had to fight at the O2. like they were
the two things I wanted to fight Blades
again and I wanted to fight at the O2
just so I can like mentally just tick
them two things off and then move
forward and uh I did both of them and I
won both fights so happy with that. John
Jones. Yeah.
How do you feel about him? I'm sick of
talking about him. I bet you are. Yeah.
Because that's what people want to talk
about. Yeah. Yeah. I mean a lot of
people now they think like all Tom does
is talk about John and
it's not the case. I don't want to talk
about John, but that's all people ask me
about. Do you know what I mean?
Everybody, like I said before, it's what
it's probably one of the most
anticipated fights in UFC history, me
and Jon Jones. So, obviously that's the
subject that people want to talk about.
That's what people are interested in.
So, um
John is an absolute legend of the sport
to answer the way I feel about him
personally is quite relevant. the the
stuff that he's done in the UFC, he will
be absolutely immortal forever. He will
always be known as one of the best ever
and I really um as a mixed martial arts
fan really really respect what he's done
in the sport. Are you fearful of
fighting him? Oh, absolutely.
Absolutely. I mean, I'd be an idiot
otherwise. Like, he's the best um one of
the best to ever put a pair of UFC
gloves on. And I think, like I say,
regardless
of what he's done outside the octagon,
and for anyone watching who doesn't
know, I am referring to these legal
issues that he's got. And that's not
that's nothing to do with me. I I have
no idea about any of that. I don't know
him personally. Um
I think inside the octagon, he is 100%
one of the best people to ever do it.
What do you admire about John Jones in
terms of his fighting style? He's
extremely smart. Extremely smart. The
way he
goes about his business in the octagon,
but also
his uh business outside the octagon and
the matchups that he's chose for
himself. Uh very smart. Very, very
smart. the way that he's chose
guys who he matches up stylistically
really well with or who are well past
the prime. I think it's genius. I think
it's absolute genius. Are you saying
that he's avoided people that would
might have beat him? I'm not saying
that. I'm saying that he's he's chose
very well. He's chose very very wisely
the right opponents at the right time,
which is super smart.
So to answer your question, yeah, I
probably am saying that I'm saying that.
So what about his you admire that his
his sort of fighting IQ? Yeah, he's so
one of the smartest fighters to ever
fight in in Yeah. Explain that to me.
Like I'm a muggle, so I don't Okay. Um
he
will he has a certain way of making
fighters fight his style, if that makes
sense. So he will constantly keep his
opponent guessing
with kind of like
different things that like he will
always have a style that suits him
really well and he will force his
opponent to fight that way if that makes
sense. It does like I guess it's kind of
difficult if you're uneducated on it but
he has his style and he will never come
out of that and risk fighting somebody
else's style ever. He will constantly
force elite guys to fight his style
which is really really difficult to do
in in a technical perspective. Kind of
saw that against uh Stipe I thought
because yeah but Stipe is also 42 years
old with a million miles on the clock.
You have to remember that. But you are
right. You're definitely right. But uh
from seeing it up close cuz I was sat
really like I was almost in touching
distance at the octagon. Stipe was more
than offbeat in that fight in terms of
how how far he is away from his prime.
What is it? What is what is it that Jon
Jones is doing there? Because you see
these great athletes who have their own
really clearly defined style. Then you
see them get in the ring with Jon Jones
and suddenly their like their style
seems to have vanished or they're scared
or or he's doing something to keep them
out like on the back foot in outside of
their zone of comfort so they can never
really get into the rhythm so they play
his game. Yeah. What is it he's doing
there? Like is it Well, first of all, he
Jon Jones is a light heavyweight. Yeah.
So he's now moved up to heavy. He's had
two fighters heavyweight but
traditionally he's a light heavyweight.
for a light heavyweight is extremely
long in terms of wingspan and and leg
length
and when you're that much taller and
this is not I'm not saying anything
about but most of the guys he's fought
are from middleweight coming up so he's
generally the taller guy and keeps
people at the end of his reach so well
like his distant distance distance
management is one of the best ever he
does that really well and then when he's
moved up to heavyweight he's fought a
guy in Surrogan who, no disrespect to
him, doesn't have a ground game. Yeah,
John Jones, one of the best wrestlers
ever in in MMA and a 42-y old Stipe. So,
he's chose really really well what he
does. But he just uses his distance
management and his timing is incredible.
like the way he uses the attributes that
he's got is honestly like from from
somebody who's studied martial arts from
like I said eight years old. It's like
it's it's almost like beautiful for me
to watch the way he expresses
different techniques under that much
pressure against a league competition.
It's amazing to watch. He's got an
incredible set of skills in that regard
because he can kick, he can punch, he
can grapple, he can wrestle. I think in
today's mixed martial arts, everybody
has to do all that. Arguably, everybody
has to be almost elite in everything.
The thing that he does really well is he
does everything on his terms inside the
octagon. Like everybody can do all all
the stuff that you just listed. Punch,
kick, elbow, knee, wrestle, grapple,
choke, arm bar, whatever.
But he does it all on his terms. And
that is something that is the elite of
the elite. And like I say, all of us,
all of us. And when I say us, I'm
talking about the professional MMA
fighter who's had one fight to Jon
Jones. All of us. Everything in between
that can do everything really well. You
have to be able to to be able to swim.
But he just does it on his terms when
his opponent is not expecting it. And
that is unbelievable. So, you must be
thinking about how you stop that. Oh,
absolutely, absolutely. It's difficult
because I don't want to over obsess
about it because there's no contract
with my name and his name signed. Yeah.
But in the back of my mind when I'm
training, of course, I'm thinking about
that kind of stuff. But I think what I
bring to the table is I'm way bigger
than anyone he's ever fought.
I'm close to my prime. I don't think
I've reached it quite yet. I think I've
still got maybe a year or so before I
get there.
And I think I'm just really I I don't
want to say I'm athletically gifted
because I'm def I've definitely put a
lot of work into it, but I think when it
comes to um athleticism for a big guy, I
think I'm like I I don't want to sound
like I'm blowing my own trumpet, but I'm
just being real. I think that I'm like
head and shoulders above any other
heavyweight. And my not only that my
decision- making I think that's the
difference is like a lot of people like
any heavyweight put a pair of gloves on
them they can knock anybody out that
goes without saying we're massive guys
but my decision making
is elite like elite elite the best some
of the best in MMA and I hate to sit
here with a load of cameras around me
and look you in the face and tell you
that but it's the honest truth I believe
that I'm also almost in my prime I'm
hungry and I bring all these physical
and technical astron attribute to the
table which somebody like for example
Steepoic who's 11 12 years older than me
and a million miles on the clock doesn't
bring. So when people see your fighting
style and they hear that you've got the
world record for the lowest average time
to end fights something just over two
minutes on average your fights last
before you knock the guy out. They're
going to be thinking right. So Tom's
strategy here is he's going to storm uh
Jon Jones and throw that that hand and
knock him out. And Jon Jones is going to
be thinking the same. John Jones is
going to be like, "Right, he's going to
try and finish me quick. That's his
game. There's literally a world record
that says that's his game." Yeah, I love
that. Like, if people think that's all I
bring to the table.
Like, I like
being a bit of a mystery. I absolutely
love that. Like, there's so much of my
game that I've not had the opportunity
to show yet. And I I absolutely love it,
you know, when people like critique the
fact that I've not been into the later
rounds or maybe I've not got the
conditioning that other guys have got or
look, that's not my problem. That's the
problem of my of my opponents. They
can't deal with what I'm throwing. I
never ever go out there to finish the
fight quick. It just happens. And that
isn't actually an issue for me. That's
the issue for the guy standing across
the octagon from me because
I have never been in a fight where I'm
trying to finish really. I'm just trying
to go out there, do my thing, see what
comes and see what's what. Like and the
fact that people are doubting what I can
do and just because they don't know
because they're not seeing it with their
own eyes. They think I can't do it,
which to me is a humongous advantage.
Humongous advantage. Like John Jones for
example is known
for his
film study. Like he loves watching his
opponent and seeing how they move,
seeing the patterns that they bring up.
And like good luck with doing that with
me, mate, because the footage isn't out
there. And I think that's also part of
the reason why he's not quick to sign
any contracts or to agree on anything.
Yeah, the money's a factor, of course.
Yeah, he's right at the end of his
career and he he might want to retire. I
don't know. I don't know how John's mind
works, but definitely somewhere it's an
insecurity of his that there isn't any
footage out there of me that you can
watch for longer than 3 or 4 minutes.
And that is just a humongous advantage
for me. Massive. Because you finished
the fight so quick. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
There's so much of my game that I've not
even been close to showing. And
I I'm very excited to surprise some of
these guys when I when I do show it. I
can't imagine how many times you must
have played over in your head. You were
talking about drilling earlier
that fight. Yeah.
Talk to me about that. Yeah, I've
definitely replay like played it a lot.
Um, but I do that with all opponents
even even guys in the in the division
right now who have not got any pro
prospects of fighting at the moment. I
think about that a lot. Like I think
about how I match up physically and
mentally with them. So So if you're
playing that over in your head, run me
through the tape. You're playing Well,
that's top secret. Is that really the
case that there's a particular
strategy that you're replaying in your
head over and over again? Absolutely.
But there's there's one thing that I
know for sure. This this is nailed on
guaranteed. And this goes for any human
being in the world. And this has been
proved time and time again. Even though
sometimes I don't believe that it can
happen, but now I know if I
punch a human being in the face as hard
as I can and it lands, they will be
unconscious. I know it because it's been
proved at the elite level multiple
times. So, I need one and that's it.
Well, I wanted to test that. So, we've
got Jack here who is
I won't punch you, Jack. Yeah. Just not
not today.
Have you had your punch power tested?
Yeah, I I have had it tested. Um, there
are guys that are have more punch power
than me on the machine. Mhm. And
probably in real life as well. What?
Whatever. But I think see I don't want
to tell you because I don't want people
to watch it and and know my secrets. But
I punch people when they're not
expecting it and they're the one they're
the ones that hurt. And I disguise it in
a certain way.
You know, I do bits on my YouTube
channel and stuff about me explaining
techniques and and doing different
things and now I've got something called
a school platform which I know you had
Alex Hormosi on the channel as well who
who has shares in school and I show
different techniques and stuff like that
but I'll never show my game if that
makes sense. I'll show a generalization
of what to do and strategy and what to
focus on and not. But my personal game
or what I do for my style, I'll never
show it because that's something for
only me and my coaches to know. And when
you think about your routine for those
six weeks, yeah, what advice can you
give to like an average person about the
health routine that you go through to
get into elite elite shape? What other
tips and tricks you've learned that you
could impart on me as someone that's not
necessarily a fighter, but Well,
something that I'm learning as I'm
getting a little bit older, and I'm not
saying I'm old by any chance, by any
stretch of the imagination, but as I'm
getting older and I'm getting more I've
been training a long time, even though
I'm not um up there in age, but I can
definitely
feel more on my body than I used to,
especially being a bigger guy. Um,
generally we carry more injuries. But I
think that if you're training, for
example, 4 hours a day,
what I found is doing at least half of
that time recovering
is what I'm aiming to do. So, however
the recovery looks to you, whether
that's stretching, breathing exercises,
sauna, swimming, steam room, jacuzzi,
you know, there's there's a whole you
Google recovery from exercise. There'll
be a million things that you can do, but
I like to try and do 50% of my training.
The easiest way I can say is if I'm
training for four hours, I try and do
two hours worth of recovery. Um, and I
think that has helped me a lot. Not to
mention, massively, massively
underrated. And as a heavyweight, I can
kind of eat what I want really if I want
to like Well, I don't have uh the
smaller weights, they all have to be
under a certain weight. So, weight
cutting is like a big thing in MMA.
People, they do extreme diets and then
cut a lot of water out the last week and
try and get, you know, squeeze as much
as they can to get under this weight
division. They weigh in, then they put
the weight back on. I just have to be
over 93 kilos and I do that no problem.
But, but doesn't your nutrition have an
impact on your performance? Of course.
Of course. So that's that's kind of what
I'm getting to is like it is so
important what you put in your body.
Like I didn't realize that until I was
maybe 28 years old, 27, 28 years old. Um
and it needs to be monitored. Like
again going back to writing stuff down
like write down what you eat in a day
and eliminate one thing for the next day
and write how you feel. Like that's what
I did a lot is like and now I'm at the
point where like I will eat similar
things at similar times every day
because I know how my body functions on
that and I know that if I'm doing an
intense session there I need a little
bit more carbs before and after and what
kind of carbs is something that I've
worked out to how I feel before and
after. And again it's just a lot of
every person's body is different. So, I
would never like to sit here and I'm not
a nutrition expert and and start going
on about what people need to eat because
that's not my expertise. But I know from
a personal point of view that writing
things down and experimenting, taking
this out and adding this in and then
writing notes on how you feel and doing
that every day has been massive for me.
What about sleep? You mentioned sleep
early on. I do like to sleep a lot. I'm
just a big napper. Like if I if I train
in the morning, I'm going to sleep
straight after. And that takes a lot of
discipline, you know? Like it takes a
lot of discipline for me to be like, I'm
coming home from training. I'm going to
shower, eat, and sleep, and nothing's
coming in the way of that. Like it takes
so especially like with kids. Like if
I'm coming home and if I've done a
two-hour session in the morning, I'm
coming home, the kids are excited to see
me. This guy's wants to play on the
Xbox, the other one wants to play
outside, this one wants a snack, and
that one wants to play outside. And then
it's just madness. And then one of them
spilled a drink. You got to clean this
up. And then one wants this on the TV.
It's just a constant thing for me to
then walk in and be like, I'm going to
bed. I'll be up in an hour and a half.
You know what I mean? Like that's that's
discipline as well. That's But all these
little increments, they just pay off
massively. Because I talked about
ketosis on this podcast and ketones, a
brand called Ketone IQ sent me their
little product here and it was on my
desk when I got to the office. I picked
it up. It sat on my desk for a couple of
weeks. Then one day I tried it and
honestly I have not looked back ever
since. I now have this everywhere I go.
When I travel all around the world, it's
in my hotel room. My team will put it
there. Before I did the podcast
recording today that I've just finished,
I had a shot of Ketone IQ. And as is
always the case when I fall in love with
a product, I called the CEO and asked if
I could invest a couple of million quid
into their company. So, I'm now an
investor in the company as well as them
being a brand sponsor. I find it so easy
to drop into deep focused work when I've
had one of these. I would love you to
try one and see the impact it has on
you, your focus, your productivity, and
your endurance. So, if you want to try
it today, visit ketone.com/stephven for
30% off your subscription. Plus, you'll
receive a free gift with your second
shipment. That's ketone.com/stephven.
I'm excited for you. I am. The hardest
conversations are often the ones we
avoid. But what if you had the right
question to start them with? Every
single guest on the diary of a co has
left behind a question in this diary.
And it's a question designed to
challenge, to connect, and to go deeper
with the next guest. And these are all
the questions that I have here in my
hand. On one side, you've got the
question that was asked, the name of the
person who wrote it, and on the other
side, if you scan that, you can watch
the person who came after who answered
it. 51 questions split across three
different levels. The warm-up level, the
open up level, and the deep level. So,
you decide how deep the conversation
goes. And people play these conversation
cards in boardrooms at work, in
bedrooms, alone at night, and on first
dates, and everywhere in between. I'll
put a link to the conversation cards in
the description below and you can get
yours at the diary.com.
You mentioned a term earlier on that we
didn't go into, which was hypnotherapy.
Yes. For someone that doesn't know what
hypnotherapy is. Can you give me like a
broad idea of what it is and how the
role that it's played in your life and
any evidence you might have seen that it
actually works? Yeah. So, I'm going like
quite hard on the hypnotherapy now. I
actually spoke to my hypnotherapist
yesterday. I'm going to start doing uh
twice a week now.
Um
a few different reasons really, both
personal and professional. I had a
situation recently uh with my kid where
uh my kid was in hospital and it really
kicked off my anxiety massively and
since then I'm struggling to relax a
little bit more than than I would
usually struggling to switch off. So, I
think that for me personally, again, I
don't want to sit here and preach about
hypnotherapy cuz it's not my expertise
at all, but for me personally, it brings
my anxiety down a lot. So, it helps with
that. Um, it also helps with sleep. It
also helps with just being just in a
more tranquil place in general. And
when you
add that those qualities into what can
be a very anxietyfilled anxietyfilled
sport, I think that's just a massive
advantage. Not to mention the other
stuff that we talked about like life and
and just general stressiness as well.
For someone that doesn't know anything
about the hypnotherapy that you do, they
might think that it's like, you know, in
back in the day it was like swinging the
thing in front of your face and then you
fall asleep and they tell you you're a
dog and you bark and stuff. used to be
on TV when I was younger. But but it's
not that, is it? It's What is it? Again,
people are going to start thinking it's
like some like like you say some woo woo
thing where you start like going
unconscious and doing all it's nothing
like that. It's like
essentially you're just in a room the
way that I do it at least. I'm in a room
with a guy talking to me. I'm completely
relaxed. Lay down or sat up, doesn't
matter. Usually with my eyes closed. And
usually he'll take you through a story
of like you go into a place, you're
walking down a street or what he'll set
the scene kind of thing. And I used to
think I need to listen and focus in on
every word he's saying. Like I need to
put myself exactly where, you know,
follow the story, quote unquote story
exactly as he's telling me to follow it.
Mhm. And I actually spoke to him about
it and I was like, I'm struggling to
like listen for that long and because it
goes on like 45 minutes. I'm struggling
to like follow the path that you're
leading me down for that long. And he's
like, listen, don't worry. You can be
thinking about whatever you want. You
don't have to follow what I'm telling
you. He said, cuz your subconscious is
listening all the time. It's same. It's
the same when a couple of times I was
like fighting to stay awake cuz I was
tired and most of the time I do it after
training as well. So I'm tired. like
fighting to stay awake and I said,
"Look, I'm fighting to stay awake. I'm
like getting really tired." And he's
like, "Look, if you fall asleep, doesn't
matter. Your subconscious is still
listening, so it doesn't matter what's
going on." And a lot of the time, I'm
just there. I'm just like chilling out.
I'm listening to what he's saying, but
I'm also drifting off of my own
thoughts. And I don't know how, again,
I'm not like a psychologist,
hypnotherapist, or anything like that.
But I only know from my own personal
perspective that when it comes to like
anxiety and positive thinking and just
generally being in a better place
mentally, I just believe in it a lot. I
think it really helps me. Anxiety? What
journey have you been on with your
anxiety? Um, it's something that I've
always kind of dealt with, but I think
it's not uncommon to deal with it. And I
think that a lot of people think it
think it is uncommon. Like I uh I'm a
little bit OCD and I think that OCD and
anxiety goes hand in hand. Like I think
that and it used to be a lot worse to be
honest. I used to I struggled with it uh
when I was a child and still struggle
with it now. But I used to be a lot
worse when I was younger. And how did
that manifest? Oh, at one point at one
point it was like I couldn't sit in a
room unless the room was the way I
wanted it to look. Like unless the
curtains were closed the right way, the
drawers were shut perfectly, everything
was facing forward, the TV was on a
certain angle, like I couldn't rest. Oh,
really? Uh because of like I would think
like something bad is going to happen
unless all that's right. But after after
a while, I kind of grew out of that a
little bit and got a hold on it. But it
still creeps back, mate. Sometimes I try
and keep it at bay. Does it come out at
certain moments when certain things
happen? Yeah. Yeah, it does. it gets
worse. Um, again, like I said, I've been
through something quite traumatic
recently where my son was in hospital
and that's a whole another story of its
own, but at one point we were really
concerned about like my son's health
really. Um, and that was a big traumatic
thing for me and I noticed a lot that my
OCD starts to come back and I want to do
certain certain stuff again because my
anxiety is creeping up and just got to
really try and keep it at bay. And
anxiety separate to that. So um your
your anxiety
is always been something in the
background in your life but it it flares
up in certain situations. Yeah. So I
mean I'm in a an anxietyfueled sport.
So um I think naturally there's a lot
going on because of that. But it's just
something I think everybody deals with
it. I don't think I'm I don't think I'm
uncommon to anybody else. I think
especially these days it's a lot more
accepted to be like talking about it and
stuff. Um, it's super common, isn't it?
It's very common. Very, very common. I
think social media doesn't help with
that. Especially for like I mean for
myself it's like I have a thing now I've
only done for the last couple of fights
where social media is gone for my life
when I've got a fight date because there
is no chance that I'm thinking about my
opponent all day and I'm also scrolling
and reading all comments all day. It's
just not I just won't deal with it. And
for the next fight, I'm actually going
to uh have like a training camp phone,
okay? Where only people who are actually
involved in my training camp or personal
life. And when I say personal life, I'm
talking about my wife, my mom, and dad.
And probably that's it, are going to be
involved. Like, I don't want to have any
outside noise coming in at all. Your
son's doing okay now. Son's doing okay
now. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Thankfully,
everything's good. puts things in
perspective, doesn't it? Honestly,
unbelievably. Um,
yeah. I mean, it wasn't really really
bad without going into too too many
details, but uh spent a stay in hospital
um with something that we wasn't sure
what it was at first and yeah,
massively. Absolutely. like nothing else
really matters if as long like as long
as you got your health and you know your
family's health like you're in a pretty
good spot I think because it's just a
horrible place to be in. Is this the son
that received an autism diagnosis? No,
this is my So one of my twins has
autism. Yeah. Yeah. This is the non
autistic. Okay. Tell me about your son
that was received the autism diagnosis
and the sort of journey you've been on
there. I I think this is really really
important because I've done this podcast
a while. Yeah. And I get so many DMs
from parents who have an autistic child
asking me to talk more about this
subject because they just don't feel
like the information is out there and
they there's a number of feelings that
they feel. I think one of them that I
see in my DMs expressed is a bit of
guilt to some degree, which is an
interesting one, but also just a lack of
people talking about the experience. So
take take me on the journey from when
that child was born and um the path to
the diagnosis. I mean I I'll give as
much detail as possible because like you
say I think parents
need details and there isn't a lot out
about it. And now for me
recently, like I say, I've been through
something traumatic with another one of
my kids. And the NHS has been absolutely
nothing short of unbelievable. Like, we
were in an emergency situation where we
needed emergency treatment. And my kid
got 24 hours a day looking after while
there was an emergency going on. And it
was unbelievable. We came away me and my
wife being like we are so lucky to live
in this country cuz my wife isn't from
this country as well. True. So we both
came away being like we are so lucky to
live here in a place where you can get
free everything
in an emergency level straight away. So
I'm not trying to throw the NHS under
the bus at all because when there's an
emergency it's amazing. That being said,
as far as the autistic community,
we are being failed. And I don't know if
that's from the NHS, from the
government. I don't know who that's
from, but I was in a spot. So, five, my
my twins are nearly six. They're coming
up to six. Um, so I was in a spot like
my twins were born and they were born
just before the lockdown. Then COVID
hit, everything like the world went to
[__] as we know. And then my kids got in
in a place where, you know, we had a
child before and we're aware that kids
hit milestones. We got twins, so they
they're hitting the milestones at
different stages. Um then we start to
notice like may maybe two year the kids
are maybe two years old. We start to
notice like one kid is a fair bit beyond
the other one in in terms of speech, in
terms of how responsive he is, in terms
of
eye contact, in in terms of law. We we
could see something's different.
But me personally, as a dad, I was kind
of like in denial as to
right, this is a lockdown's fault. This
kid is 2 years old. He's been in the
house. He's been around me, my wife, and
his two brothers, sometimes grandparents
when the government would would let us.
And that's it for like two years. He's
not in social situations. He's not
around other kids. And that kind of went
on for a bit. I was kind of like heavily
in denial about it. Even though now
looking back, I could clearly see that
things weren't moving normally,
especially because he's got this twin
and the twin's like, you know, he's
moving at a different rate. So, it was
right there in front of my face. Um, but
I'm just like in this denial. He'll
catch up. It's just a lockdown's fault.
The government's keeping us all locked
inside. Blah blah blah. Patty McInness,
funny enough, who's a guy from uh my
area, like from a similar area. Don't
know Patty at all. Never met him. Um,
but he had this program um and it was
about autism. And I don't know why. One
day me and my wife we sat down and
watched this program and he I believe
has three autistic children. all of his
all of his three children are diagnosed
with autism. So anyway, I'm watching
this documentary and he's he's talking
about all the different
symptoms because it's a massive spectrum
autism. There's there's a million
different things. And I'm watching he's
talking about this one kid. He does
this. This is this is the way that
autism presents himself in this
particular kid. And in my mind, I'm
thinking my my son does do that a little
bit. And then he's talking about a
different kid who who also is diagnosed
with autism the way that the the child
does this. And I'm thinking
anyway, he's he's going through talking
about his different children. And I'm
thinking, wow, he like my my child ticks
a lot of these boxes
and then I Google it. I don't I know
nothing about autism at the time. And
obviously that is the worst thing you
can ever do. and I'm going through these
symptoms being like, "Wow, this is when
I don't know what to do. Like, we need
to try and try and get help."
So, anyway, we make a doctor's
appointment at the GP and that is a
complete mess. It's difficult to get an
appointment. We go in, they put us on a
waiting list. Anyway,
a year or so goes by,
the the child
isn't developing at the speed of his
twin. We can see this clearly. We are
worried about what's going on and um
we don't know what to do. Like we are
literally
we have no idea about what's going on,
how to progress this child,
what his future's going to look like. We
know nothing about autism, me and my
wife at the time. Absolutely zero about
it. We don't know. It's just so such
anxiety.
like you don't know what your child's
future's going to look like and how to
help him or her on how to progress as a
human being. That is some of the worst
anxiety that you can ever have. You've
brought this kid to this earth
and you can't even point them in the
right direction of where to go on how to
navigate the way through life and it's
it's a really really difficult thing.
Anyway, I go on a question of sport the
show. Patty McInness is the host.
Me and P me and Patty are chatting a
little bit and uh after the show,
whatever. And I said, "Look, Patty, if
you don't mind me asking, uh I I watch
your show about um autism." I said, "I'm
trying to get my kid diagnosed. I've
been I've been on the waiting list a
year. Like, what should we do?" So,
anyway, he gives me the number to the to
the specialist. I call the specialist.
We go in for a meeting. Long story
short, paid for the diagnosis,
got this kid diagnosed, and now my child
is in a mainstream school. He has a
one-to-one one-to-one teacher. He's
getting the help he needs. He's doing
really well. He's progressing.
How the future's going to look, we don't
know. We we're dealing with it dayto
day. And now I am completely aware
that as a person in a good financial
situation I have the ability to do that
is to go pay the money and get that. And
now there is so many people so so many
people who and I mean I get hundreds of
messages about it. Hundreds of people
stopping me on the street about it
because I've spoke a little bit about
autism who they are going to the GP.
They're going for assessments and they
cannot get a diagnosis. They're on a
three, four, five year waiting list. And
these kids are getting sent to
mainstream schools and the kids are just
regressing and regressing and regressing
because they don't have any help and the
parents of the kids have zero direction
and they don't know what to do. And
we're in a really tough spot with it in
this country where like I said, we've
got this amazing NHS. I don't know if
it's the NHS that's holding this or the
government, but and I don't know what's
causing autism. There's a million things
out there about vaccinations, about
diet, about things that they're watching
on TV, about the toys that they play
with. You know, there's a load of
different theories on it. Me personally,
I don't know what it is. Obviously, I'm
not a specialist with that, but I know
that autism is getting bigger and bigger
each year. There's more and more people
trying to get diagnosed. There's more
and more people getting diagnosed.
and the help just isn't there. The help,
especially in schools, like I'm so lucky
that my son has an amazing one-to-one
teacher. Every day he goes and he enjoys
school and he progresses a little bit.
And we know what we're in a position
where we've had help as parents that we
know what kind of direction and where to
navigate him in sometimes. Now, there's
so many parents out there who've been
on, like I say, three, four, five, six,
seven year waiting list. their kids are
just getting worse and worse and worse
and as a penalty to that the parents
life are then getting worse and worse
and worse and they have absolutely no
direction of where to go and what to do
and it's a serious serious crisis that
we've got in this country at the moment
there are in this country there are
700,000 autistic adults and children um
but in the US roughly 2.5% of the US
population has been diagnosed with
autism and it is four times more common
in boys than girls and there was a 787%
rise in the number of autism diagnosis
over the last roughly two decades um
which is on one hand awareness being is
higher. So people are going and getting
a diagnosis but some think there might
be other factors that are actually
increasing the amount of people that are
autistic. Why for someone that doesn't
understand autism and the process that
and the plight of a parent that has an
autistic child is the diagnosis so
critical? Is it because you then get
additional support and guidance and you
can access that support if you have a
diagnosis? So I was under the notion
that if my kid is diagnosed autistic or
not, doesn't matter. That was that was
my original thing. Doesn't matter. He's
still my kid. I'm still going to love
him. I'm still going to guide him
through whatever he needs to in life.
Now I completely respect anybody who's
doing that. He has 100% respect from
from me and I'm sure everybody else. But
the biggest issue is like me personally,
I'm a professional athlete. It's like I
know that for this many hours a day, I
need to be in the gym and training. When
I'm not in the gym, I need to be
recovering. When I'm not in the gym, I
need to be eating the right things. And
I have this process of of things that
make me successful. That's how I work in
my life.
If you don't have a diagnosis of autism,
the only way I can describe it, because
I've been there, is you're just kind of
like treading water. You're just stuck
in one place flailing around and not
really knowing how to do them steps and
progress your family life in your
child's life. That's the way that I look
at it personally. I'm speaking 100% for
myself, but if you not got a diagnosis,
first of all, you're not getting any
funding, which like I said, I'm in a
financial position where I don't need
any funding, but there's a lot of people
out there who do need funding. And
funding looks like
outlets for the child,
help in school, help at home, help for
the parents, help for the friends,
sensory rooms in school, sensory toys,
you know, there's a whole host of things
that can help autistic children or
autistic people. And without that
diagnosis, if you don't if you're a
parent and you don't have that for your
child, from my personal experience, it
feels like you're treading water. I feel
like I needed a process of this is these
are the steps that we have to take to
help my child progress. And I think that
it's what we need is it's not about
another number on the statistics that
you've read out. It's not about that.
It's not about me saying I've got an
autistic child or whatever. It's about
the help that your child can get. And
right now we definitely don't have
enough help in this country. I had one
of my best friends was diagnosed with
autism. Um he's been one of my best
friends for a long time. He's actually
also worked at my company um for for
many many years. And he spoke to me
about the sense of relief that he
experienced when he got his diagnosis.
But also it was kind of like like you're
describing there was suddenly a sense of
direction and understanding like someone
turned the lights on and with the lights
on he was able to make better decisions
and it's not held him back in any If
anything, it's done the opposite. It's
helped him to understand himself. But I
think for for some of us who don't
understand, haven't been through that,
we either don't can't relate, but but
also we have no no idea that there's
additional I had no idea until you just
said it just then that there's
additional support given in schools and
stuff like that to kids who have that
diagnosis. So, it's critically important
and I'm so glad that you share that with
us because hopefully there's some people
watching in the government but also
parents that can get together and that
are presumably getting together to
change this. Yeah. I mean, it's a tough
thing for me to talk about because I'm
completely aware that there will be
people watching this and thinking who is
this knucklehead talking about like
autism diagnosis and what the government
needs to go through. But it's also an
experience that I've lived and it's also
an experience that I'm still living.
Mhm. And that I'm fully aware just from
my local area and my circle of friends
and people around me that there is a
[__] ton of people who are in the same
boat as I am and need help. And uh I
feel extremely lucky and grateful that
I've got the help and that we are
progressing. But I know that there's a
lot of people who don't and that are
struggling. So I want to try and speak
for those people if I can. Thank you for
doing that. That's there's a lot of my
audience that are going to be very very
grateful for that. There's something sat
next to me on the table here, which is
this this belt. It's very very heavy. I
know this is just a replica, but you do
have the real one at home. And the
reason why um you only bought me the
replica instead of the real thing. Um is
because the real thing costs a lot of
money apparently. Apparently.
Apparently. So I I heard rumors online
that the real thing actually costs about
300 grand. Yeah. And you have to sign a
contract when you receive this belt that
if you lose it, then you have to
personally pay. If it goes missing, I'm
paying for it. So hopefully that won't
that won't happen. But it's in a very
safe spot, so it won't it won't go
missing. I'm not going to ask you where
you keep it cuz there's people
listening. But um just what are these
flags around it? I've actually never
seen one before. So I'm not too sure. I
know this bit this bit here. The side.
Yeah. So these these little um these
stones whatever they are uh you get one
of those are the different so they're
all I think on the real one the diamonds
and this is a is is it a ruby or
something? A ruby it looks like you get
a ruby when you defend it. So I defended
it once so I got one and then obviously
that fills up the more you do it. Oh, so
if you defend it one two three four five
six seven times it's going to be all
eight rubies. Yeah. Okay. What what does
that say there? It says UFC 304 Edwards
versus Muhammad 2. My personal one has
my like my name on it and the the proper
details but cuz this is a replica. And
when you won that interim heavyweight
championship
and then you woke up the next day, how
did you feel
honestly? Well, I woke up about 3 days
later.
I didn't sorry I didn't sleep for about
3 days after uh cuz I was very excited.
Um, yeah, pretty good. Pretty I mean I I
won it in weird circumstances. So that
fight I took on really short and I will
say I actually wasn't in shape for that
fight at all. Um I actually just come
back off a off a stagd do so I wasn't uh
in my best shape when I when I answered
that call. Um was there any anti-limax
to it? No. No, but
there's definitely an anti-limax a
little bit to um
like being quote unquote successful
because you still feel the same like as
you you still have the same um issues
like issues as you had before like
money, fame and titles doesn't change
much in terms of what goes on inside
your brain in my opinion. Maybe it does
change some for some people, but uh for
me, I still have the same struggles as I
did before. It doesn't change anything
in that regard. I think when you're
younger, especially, I don't know. It's
like young people, they think that rich
people have no problems, and it just
isn't true. It's just it's just so far
from the truth. You know that. Yeah.
Well, you know, they say more money,
more problems, but it's just a different
set of problems than some of the other
Well, that's it. That's it. I mean, at
one point, as we spoke about in detail,
a big problem was of mine was I couldn't
pay my rent and I couldn't pay fuel to
put in the car. That's gone. But there
there's more problems that have arose
since um the money won't fix. Do you
know what I mean? Are you at all
concerned that when you when your time
does come, you want to retire relatively
early so you don't get any cognitive
issues or have to fight beyond your
time. Are you at all concerned about
what you do next? Cuz we've seen people
like Tyson Fury sort of really struggle.
I I am a little bit to be honest. I'd be
lying if I said otherwise. Um,
just because it takes up so much of my
time. Takes up so much of my time and
the time that I'm not actually actually
physically training like I'm not in the
gym training. I am doing other stuff
towards it. I.e.
even stuff like breathing exercises I
would class as part of my training.
Stretching, eating right, sleep like I
would class this all as part of my
training routine.
So when I've not got that,
what will my life look like? I don't
know. I I don't know. And that's
something
as we spoke about before, I'm aware that
I'm on the second half of my career now.
When that's done, how does it look? And
I don't know if anything can ever
replace that in all honesty. What about
the money side of things? So are you
having to think now? Cuz what's the
average age of a UFC fighter retiring? I
mean, most people don't even get there,
but if you do really, really well, you
might fight until if you're really
really lucky, you might do Stipes's age
40ish. 40. Yeah. Yeah. Bigger guys tend
to go longer. I don't know why that is,
but yeah, generally the heavyweights
usually 40ish. So, how do you think
about financial longevity? And are you
investing your money? Have you got
people that help you? I do. I do. I'm
looking to um invest all the time.
actually my team has actually been
really um
really good with that kind of stuff.
Like a lot of my uh not a lot but a few
of my sponsorships I actually have uh
shares in business as well as the
sponsorship and also I want to do more
stuff. I really love the sport of MMA so
I'm always like even though I'm retired
from fighting I will never be involved
I'll never be retired from MMA if that
makes sense. I've definitely made
mistakes in the media space before,
definitely, but I'm learning. And I
definitely think there's a place for me
somewhere in the future to educate
people on MMA, however that looks,
whether it's punditry,
whether it's podcasts, whether it's I
don't know some something somewhere. I
definitely think that I will give some
kind of insight to somebody where people
can um hopefully learn something from me
in that regard. I think you're more than
capable of doing that. I'd love to see
you give uh breakdowns. I've seen some
of the stuff you're doing with school as
well. So, you know, a Thank you. I've
also I've also uh they've I don't know
why, but they g my own show now on TNT
Sport as well, breaking down fights. So,
this is uh this start. I'm just getting
the foot in the door. It's not something
that I'm focusing on full-time now
because I'm obviously really busy with
other stuff, but um when I'm done,
that's what I want to do. What does your
dad think of all of this? He's been such
a central figure in your in your life.
this whole Jon Jones situation. You went
in the this belt that sits in front of
me here. You must have like blown his
mind. I don't think so. Really? Yeah. I
think that he had this firm belief. He
believed in me way before I believed in
myself. I always say and I think that
this is also his dream as well. But I
don't think for any of us, and this is
going to sound super arrogant, but it's
the truth. I don't think any of us are
surprised by it. I think that in some
way uh it was like written for us to do
it. I don't know. I I I can't explain it
any more than that. Like I feel like we
were both expecting to be here and uh
this is where we are and and this is
where we're going to be till till I'm
done. Did he ever tell you you were
going to be here? Yeah. What did he say?
Just just little. He was never like
you're going to be that. But it was
like, look, if you keep doing this, this
is where you're going to go. If you if
you keep being dedicated to training and
keep living your life right and keep
focused, you can be heavyweight champion
of the world. And I think that
especially cuz I'm from like a smaller
town, a blueco collar town for sure, a
workingass town that that belief is shut
down so much from a young age by not
just parents but pe other people
surrounding in the community. Like
listen, maybe don't maybe don't
don't think you're going to be a
Hollywood actor because you're not.
Maybe maybe try and be a bit more
realistic and do something a bit No, if
you think you're going to be a Hollywood
actor, you go for it. Like you you go
100% at that and don't let anything
waver from where you're going. And I
think that that is not told to
especially the younger generation
enough. I think that like I say I'm from
a very very blue collar humble town and
from my town there aren't many people
who've done anything of great magnitude
in in terms of sport and otherwise. Um,
and I think a lot of that, not not all
of it of course, but I think a lot of it
comes from the mentality of, yeah, maybe
don't maybe don't aim for that. Aim for
something a bit lower. And that that
shouldn't be encouraged in my opinion.
Always
your first option should be the highest
of the high. And if you land any lower,
then you readjust. You change the goal
post a little bit. But the first thing
is shoot as high as you can. Are you
special? Yes.
Why are you special?
I think that
I have an First of all, I think I'm
really physically gifted. Mhm. In terms
of uh athleticism, but it's something
that I have worked on a lot as well.
It's not I didn't just wake up like
this. I've definitely worked a lot over
the years of it. But I think that aside,
I think I've got a gift mentally and
this this has been
horned a lot by the people around me
through the years. Like I said, there's
been a lot of people supporting me. But
I think I've got a gift to
perform really, really well under
massive pressure. Under massive
pressure. And I don't think, like I say,
it's been honed a lot for sure by my dad
and the other people around me,
definitely. But I think that I I have a
God-given gift or whoever universe given
gift or whoever you believe in that I
can perform extremely well under the
highest pressure situations possible.
Even though you feel the fear. Even
though I feel the fear because I accept
the fear. I bathe in the fear.
I think uh it's not the first time
you've said that. No, it's something
that someone told me. It's something
that someone told me recently. I thought
it was funny. So, when you feel that
fear, is there something you say to
yourself? Is there like a mantra or a
system? Well, I I always say that I used
to have two fights. I used to be
fighting my opponent. I used to be
fighting myself. I used to be trying to
block out the fear trying to like But
you know what? I just I just took it on
board and I accepted that this this is
going to help me like you. There's so
many examples over the years. I I like
to give this example because uh this
actually happened to one of my close
friends. So, he's putting a wardrobe up
and the wardrobe is like a really heavy
wardrobe fell on his kid who was like
not even walking at the time
and he he's he's a skinny guy like he's
a small slight guy. He was on his own
and he he pulled the wardrobe off the
kid, right?
And then anyway, everything was fine.
The kid was fine. everything, whatever.
5 minutes later, he went to move the
wardrobe to another part of the room and
realized that he couldn't pick it up.
And there's only one thing that's made
him pick that wardrobe up, and his fear.
Fear that that kid is going to get
crushed under that really heavy
wardrobe. And when he actually went to
pick the wardrobe up without that, there
was no way he could have done it. He had
to he had to wait till somebody came and
and helped him move the wardrobe across
the room. There was no way that he could
have done it without the fear. And
there's so many situations like if
you're running for your life, 100%
guaranteed that you're running way
quicker than you would if you were just
running down the street goes without
saying because that fear fuels you in
ways that you nothing else will and I
have accepted that and took it on board
and used it to help me. Because as
someone that's watched your fights both
on screen but in person, I one of the
things that I remember about you more so
than other fighters I've seen is how
calm you look in the ring. Y and I don't
I'm like does he just know he's like
amazingly good or is there something
he's doing? Because you kind of look how
I look when I get to the office
and I don't have some 6'5 guy that's
trying to kill me. Oh, it's all it's all
by design though. Really? It's by
design. Yeah. Um, so one of my one of my
absolute heroes in the sport of MMA is a
guy called GSP, George St. Pierre. He's
one of the best fighters to ever lace up
the gloves. But not only that, he's one
of the best humans as well. I'm lucky
enough to have met him a few times and
had some deep discussions with him. And
he's someone I've studied a lot inside
and outside of the octagon over the
years. Um, and
thing with GSP is he like me has always
admitted how scared he was. And that's
something that I've watched countless
interviews and podcasts with him and how
he talks about it and stuff. and he used
a method and he actually told me about
the method where I'm not sure what the
method's called and I don't I don't even
know if there's any scientific evidence
behind it but it works for him and it's
worked for me on multiple occasions
where if you physically present yourself
in a way that even if mentally you don't
feel like that like on fight day for
example the last thing I feel like doing
is smiling in all honesty I'm not in a
smiley mood but when you smile you feel
good. You relax. You enjoy yourself.
You're confident. So, I will walk around
fake smiling with my head held high and
my shoulders back like there's nothing
bothering me in the world. Not because
there isn't anything bothering me
because trust me, on fight day there's a
lot of stuff bothering me. I have to get
in there in front of millions of people
and have a fight with someone and it's
highly likely that I'm going to be
separated from my own consciousness in
front of millions of people. The last
thing I want to do is walk around with a
smile on my face, with my shoulders
back, with my head up high, being
friendly and nice to people and being in
a good mood and being relaxed. That's
the last thing I feel. But I purposely
walk around like that all day in every
situation that I can possibly be in. And
sooner or later, believe it or not, my
mind will actually start to follow my
body's lead. And it's unbelievable. It's
unbelievable the way that that can
happen. And like you say, you'll see me.
I'm stood there in the octagon and I am
scared to death. My opponent is looking
at me across the octagon like he wants
to kill me. And I'm looking back like
I'm in the queue for a sandwich. By
design. By design, I do it. The same
with the walk to the octagon.
There's a million people throwing beer
on me, shouting in my face, booing me,
sticking fingers up in my face, saying
that I'm going to die literally while
I'm walking to fight another human
being.
And I look like I've just woke up and
taken the dog for a walk by design
because if your body does it sooner or
later your mind will start to follow and
like I say this is like a bro science
thing probably but this is something
that I've experienced a lot myself and
it's proven at least to me and and to to
George as well that uh it can be done.
We have a closing in on this podcast
where the last guest leaves a question
for the next guest not knowing who
they're going to be leaving it for. This
question is hilarious as far as I'm
concerned and it kind of reveals who
left the question, right? The question
is, it's weird saying this to you.
Why don't you work harder?
That's a good question. Who Who's left
that? Can you Can you figure it out from
what we said? I know. So, this was the
last guest. I told you I was in America.
Oh, Mr. Beast. Mr. Beast,
why don't you work harder? That's a good
question. It's a It's a good question. I
like to think I work as hard as I can,
but I think if everybody looks in the
mirror,
I think everybody could work a bit
harder. I think I probably like sleep
too much
is the reason that I don't I think
that's the only thing holding me back
cuz everything when I'm awake,
everything's geared towards me being the
best that I can be. So, I think maybe I
like sleep a little bit too much. Well,
sleep makes you work harder. It does.
That's what I thought. That's what I
thought. Oh, that that that's uh that's
still working hard as far as I'm
concerned. Tom, thank you so much. Um
you are such an incredible inspiration
for so many reasons mainly because
you're so remarkably down to earth but
at the same time able to confidently
say on camera which I by the way really
really admire and respect that you think
you're special. And I think there's a
certain nonchalantness that sometimes
people come with because they're trying
to be like fake humble. Yeah. But I
really respect people that say, "No, no,
no, I think I'm special." And to be able
to say that with such humility, but also
with such a track record to justify that
claim is in tremendously spiring because
you come from, as you say, like a blue
collar area. You come from a normal
place. You're a normal guy that has just
committed himself to something despite
the any short-term or medium-term
rewards in your life because you loved
it and you believed in yourself. And I
think that for for anybody listening
should be evidence enough that we we all
have a chance at at least something. It
might not be being the heavyweight
champion of the world because you
acknowledge you have physical gifts that
you know myself I don't I wasn't born
with but um but we can all do something
with that obsession with that focus with
a supporting group of people around us
with the right mentality and with a
commitment to it despite um the
objective reality that we're going
through. But also, I admire you so much
because of everything you've said about
your child with autism and the work
you're doing to push harder for um to to
reduce the diagnosis times in the NHS at
the moment, which so many parents out
there are going to really appreciate. Um
and we are all behind you as a nation.
You're a good guy. You'd be the first
ever to do to unify the belts in such a
way um as a British guy. And uh
wouldn't that be something?
Listen, if anybody can do it and and
just saying about the special thing.
Mhm.
I wasn't born special. And like you
said, I am from the most regular
background that you can come from. And I
don't mean to say I'm not saying I'm
special that in the fact that like I'm
better than anybody else because I
believe that anybody can be special. And
I think more people need to believe it.
You know what I mean? I think that more
people
if they work hard enough and don't quit
on themselves, they can be special as
well. And uh I think we'll leave it at
that. Amen. Thank you so much, Tom.
Thank you.
[Music]